---
title: ambarisha - dilipa 2800-2700
sno: 57
---

The reign passes to Bhagīratha’s eldest son after him, Śruta by most Paurāṇika accounts. To Śruta is born Nabhāga, and to Nabhāga is born Ambarīṣa. In him we are visited by the next major discrepancy in the Aikṣvāku genealogy. Some Purāṇas make Ambarīṣa Māndhātṛ’s son, and Nabhāga follows after him. In both cases the grandson is named Sindhudvīpa and the line follows after him. The centuries after Bhagīratha are characterised by a movement of northern India from Chalcolithic to Bronze Age proper. This is the mature Harappan period on the Sarasvatī and Sindhu, where writing, town-planning and other elements of civilisation will take final shape. While north Gaṅgā eventually does adopt the Indus writing script and eastern UP doesn’t, the entire Gangetic Plains at this time had the same material culture and likely the same language (albeit with dialectical differences). Linguists consider modern Indo-Aryan languages not a descendant of Ṛgvedic Saṃskṛtam, but of a dialect spoken parallely in the Gangetic Plains.

Ambarīṣa’ reign is fraught with dis-synchronisms. He encounters the ṛṣis Rcikā and Viśvāmitra, who are placed many centuries before him. And if we take him to be the son of Māndhātṛ then he appears a few centuries before them. Neither route allows us to place him in the genealogy in a way that makes him contemporaneous to Viśvāmitra. Thus the story of Śunaśepa at Ambarīṣa’s sacrifice makes little historical sense. What we find in Ambarīṣa’s life is a period of general peace, evidenced by the fact that his stories pertain more to rituals, donations and sacrifices than to wars and conquest. This makes sense when we evaluate the larger political scenario in India at the time. The Haihayas were destroyed by Sagara several centuries ago, and succeeding kings managed to clear the Gangetic Plains of Rākṣasas and consolidate the kingdom of Kosala. This is why we see also see a flowering of agriculture and animal husbandry.

One guess we could make is that there are discontinuities in Aikṣvāku genealogy around Ambarīṣa’s era, explaining the confusion around his own placement. In comparison to what happened to the various Ailā lines, it’s indeed remarkable that the Aikṣvāku shows almost unbroken continuity over the same period. If the brotherly ethos displayed in the Rāmāyaṇa are any indicator of Aikṣvāku family values, perhaps fraternal rivalries in the clan were rare and primogeniture was widely accepted. But even if true this can only be a general norm, implying exceptions here and there. The kingdom of Kosala at some point does split, though there is confusion in what manner. Later in history we find Dakṣiṇa Kosala to exist in modern Chhattisgarh, but in the Rāmāyaṇa, Kausalyā is said to hail from Uttara Kosala even in reference to Ayodhyā.

There are in fact a number of confusions during the period 2800-2300 BC which we might have to always live with. A few generations after Ambarīṣa are born Sudās and his grandson Kalmāsapāda Saudāsa, and the latter has a bitter falling out with a Vasiṣṭha ṛṣi. Not too separated to them in time, the Ṛgveda’s Sudās also replaces his Vasiṣṭha with a Viśvāmitra (who we’ve seen is incongruously associated with Ambarīṣa). Also around the same time, the Rāmāyaṇa tells us that Daśaratha battles a Dānava named Śaṁbara, while the Ṛgveda informs us that Divodāsa does the same. In more cases than one, it appears that this period was remembered in different ways by the primary tribes/dynasties of India (another example is the ambiguity around Purukutsa and Trasadasyu). The era appears to us as an incomplete palimpsest. Only parts of it are discernible, but each is through the eyes of a different people, and thus each remembers time, genealogy and history in different ways. It’s true that there are good reasons to rate Ṛgvedic evidence higher, but ultimately these discrepancies will always stay with us, and are an inevitable component of a history so ancient. Kalmāṣapāda is associated with the names Śakti Vasiṣṭha and Nodhā Gautama, both of whom are Ṛgvedic composers.

In the case of Śakti, we’re told that Kalmāṣapāda gravely offends him and is cursed to wander as a Rākṣasa for twelve years- likely an exile to the forests. To Pargiter this represents a possible split in the Aikṣvāku line and a division in the kingdom, and reunification is achieved a few generations later by Dilīpa II Khaṭvāṅga. Pargiter infers this given Dilīpa II’s repute as a cakravartin, but literature only tells us of his campaigns in Tibet and his attack on the city of Alakāpuri on Lake Mānasarovara. What we can be certain is that Dilīpa’s reign restores stability to the kingdom, for the names of kings following him are similarly remembered by most texts. Over a wider perspective, Dilīpa II brings closure to a line in disarray since Māndhātṛ close to a millennia ago, since that is where discontinuities in Aikṣvāku genealogy begin. Sagara brought stability, but the confusion around Ambarīṣa indicates that it did not last. With Dilīpa II though begins an unbroken line. It takes us to his great-great-grandson, arguably ancient India’s most prominent national hero and international import.