---
title: archeological
sno: 7
---

Indian archaeology will be discussed in greater detail in the next chapter, but in the context of AIT but a few points merit mention:

- Decades of work has failed to provide any evidence of an invasion into north India. Even any purported migration from the west has not been found in the archaeological record. This is what compels linguists to insist that “pots don’t speak.”
- Compare this with the situation in Europe, mentioned previously, where there are clear archaeological markers of invasion by a foreign population from the east. The origin of this population has been posited as the Pontic Steppe, but nothing precludes the Pontic people (or their language/culture) from having originated further east. Even genetic evidence that talks of Steppe Pastoralists confesses that their own ancestry is unknown.
- Indian civilisation shows continuity from Mesolithic/Neolithic stages to Bronze and Iron Age cultures without a break in the record, accompanied by wholly indigenous development of agriculture and metallurgy. The archaeology veteran, BB Lal, who first associated the Painted Grey Ware culture with Aryans, later confessed this to be a false conclusion based on a priori narratives. He has since been at the forefront of establishing India’s deep archaeological continuity.
- The skeletal and cranial record in India does not show any break from at least 4500 BC.
- Archaeology has found horse remains and fire altars in the Harappan civilisation, which address some of the primary points AIT has clung to over the years. Again, evidence such as this is denied by reputationists.
- The Ghaggar-Hakra river system is well agreed to be the Ṛgvedic Sarasvatī.
- The Bactria Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC), found north of India in Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan was considered Indo-Iranian by its original excavator. Further, genetics has shown that it was not a source of ancestry for Indians. This completely overturns the existing paradigm that BMAC was a stopping point for Indo-Iranians on their way from the Steppe, before their split and eventual entry into India and Iran.
- It’s now been proven that while bos indicus, the Indian cow, has no admixture of genes from bos taurus, the Taurine Cow of Europe, the converse is true. This means that the Indian cow went west, but no cows came east to India. To continue to plead AIT in this case means pleading that human migration was in opposite direction to domesticated cattle migration! Using Mallory-Adams’ terminology, it means that Neolithic PIE-people who were intimate with domesticated cattle brought not a single cow with them, and instead somehow chose horses as totem which they were only “somewhat familiar with.”
- Similarly the domestic mouse, associated with the advent and spread of agriculture, has been found to have originated in India. Tangentially, this implies that agriculture spread from India to the west and not the other way around. Or at least food grains did, for the domestic mouse follows grain storage facilities.
- Alexander Semenenko has shown that the vaunted horse-chariots of the Steppe cultures, once associated with Aryans, were in fact simple horse-drawn carts. Contrast this with the discovery of a true chariot in Sinauli, UP, dated to at least 1900 BC- four centuries before the Aryans were said to have come to India. A fully-formed chariot in 1900 BC should anyway lead us to assume antecedents from at least a few centuries prior, so we know that horse-drawn carts of the Steppe variety would have been known in India 2300-1900 BC.
- Some archaeological limitations will always exist. We still need more ancient DNA data from the Harappan civilisation, but finding it from the Gangetic Plains will be difficult given the practice of cremation. The Gangetic Plains have been continuously inhabited for at least 10,000 years, and the ravages of time and monsoons have removed much of the ancient wood-based archaeological evidence. Even the palace of someone as late as Candragupta Maurya was said to have been made of wood, and is unlikely to ever be conclusively found.

Of the above, the first two points are the most salient. They take us back to the original assertion that linguistics can only tell us that there was a PIE homeland. It cannot alone tell us anything of where that homeland was. The remaining facts speak to the Ṛgvedic Aryans’ indigenity to India, and to the fact that at least through the cow and mouse we know that Indians migrated west. This bring us to the larger picture about migrations and invasions in general. History did not begin at 1500 BC, nor at 3000 BC nor even at 8000 BC. Humans have been living in Eurasia for many thousands of years, and the national borders of today were non-existent. Through the Hindu Kush, via passes such as Khyber and Bolan, humanity has always travelled to and from India. North of Kashmir, passes through Tajikistan open the doors to east China and Central Asia. Long coastlines on either side have allowed Indian seamen to built great trading empires. Indian tradition holds memories of many groups migrating out of India, and later of Central Asians coming in large numbers. For the Harappan civilisation that matures by 2500 BC, we now have antecedents in the form of pre-Harappan cultures, indicating that it did not evolve out of a vacuum. All of this tells us that of course humans could have migrated to and from India in 1500 BC, in 3000 BC, or before, and that surely this did not happen just once.

Denying the AIT does not mean denying human migration itself, nor does it mean denying that a PIE language existed. Specifically, denying AIT means denying the foreign origin of Saṃskṛtam and Vedic culture on the basis of textual, linguistic and archaeological evidence. Further, using all of these a robust out-of-India case can be built, and in its full form it has yet to be disproven even as its acceptance in academic circles is hindered by a mix of naive Hindu traditionalism and rabid Hinduphobia, with a destructive feedback loop between them creating impenetrable echo chambers. As a complete theory of Indo-European origins OIT has implications for all of humanity. But in the Indian context all we do is prove that the people who called themselves Ārya and composed the Ṛgveda were wholly indigenous to India. Beyond that, if it is proven tomorrow that proto-PIE speakers migrated to India, say in 8000 BC, it would have no bearing on Vedic and Saṃskṛtam indigenity whatsoever.

We’ve previously mentioned the Nostratic language theory which opens up a new layer of questions on human cultures, origins and migrations. Nostratic doesn’t have broad scholarly consensus, but it has indeed put together more than 200 root words that are common to the descendant languages. Dated to the 7-6th millennia BC the language is placed usually around the Fertile Crescent, and Indian tradition could have answers here too. We could speculate that the era of Pṛthu Vainya in ~6500 BC represents the chief Nostratic dispersal event. This is of course pure speculation, but it indicates that the larger story of human languages and families is far from closed.

This is easy to see when we shed modern reductions of the ancient civilisational world. Evidence mounts that the ancient humans were more civilised and connected than we give them credit for, and Dravidian and Austroasiatic languages could have a deep history of maritime and cultural dispersals. We are yet to scratch at the surface of these things, but we can be certain that the culture represented by Vedic literature was born on the Sarasvatī, was wholly indigenous to the land around it and can be reasonably dated in time. The larger PIE sprachbund, or language area, could have spanned an area ranging to Tajikistan and Uzbekistan in the north and Iran in the east, putting it in the neighbourhood of a variety of different cultures and language families. Similar attempts are done with the Dravidian language family, where evidence of it in modern Balochistan or Iraq is used to posit an outside-India origin for it. This too ignores all evidence of Dravidian’s deep roots in the Indian subcontinent. When it comes to India, it seems that our history is only that of what invaded/migrated/trickled in, and to even suggest an opposite direction is both revisionism and chauvinism! This when genetically India is emerging as humanity’s second primordial homeland, outside of Africa.

Archaeological and textual evidence on the AIT table is also brought by Avestan and Mitanni. The Zend Avesta is the primary document of Zoroastrians, and Avestan language is considered a near dialect to Vedic Saṃskṛtam. Attested in inscriptions in the Middle East in 1500 BC, Mitanni evidences the presence of Indo-Aryans there from at least 1900 BC. Here the work of Talageri has quite irrefutably won the debate, but mainstream scholarship tends to side-step his evidence. The primary narrative of the Indian-Iranian-Mitanni connection is that PIE-speakers dispersed from their original homeland, reached Anatolia and the Fertile Crescent where the Mitanni and their descendants split up, proceeded towards Iran where the Iranian language split, and finally reached India where manifested the Indo-Aryan language family. We must understand the necessary implications of this interpretation, which stand refuted when Ṛgvedic internal chronology is considered. The implication is that in the earliest layers of the Ṛgveda we must find the most common elements between Indo-Aryan, Mitanni and Iranian. Whatever was shared between these cultures must by definition fade over time, such that its incidence in the Ṛgveda should be descending. What does Ṛgvedic internal chronology suggest?

Talageri has analysed the incidence of linguistic indicators, i.e. of names and geography, to show that Ṛgvedic internal chronology paints an entirely different picture than mainstream conjecture. Common elements with Mitanni, such as name suffixes –aśva, -ratha, -sen and prefixes bṛhad-, sapta- and abhi- are found exclusively in the later books and are completely absent in the early books. Similar is the case when common elements with Zend Avesta are considered, including the consideration of meters. If the PIE people originated outside India, split towards Mitanni first, Iranian second and finally to Indo-Aryan, then we should find common elements between these cultures in the earliest layers of the Ṛgveda. Instead we find an opposite scenario. Names and geography that share common elements are found in the later books of the Ṛgveda, indicating that the split happened near the Sarasvatī valley.

This approach is criticised on some extremely flimsy grounds that evade the primary implications it asserts. Fournet reminds us that names carry through the ages, and that names in any age can be rendered into a singular linguistic style. This is true and salient for an absolute chronology of the Ṛgveda. But Talageri’s analysis relies on its internal chronology, which is well established among scholars. The chronological division between early and later books is not his imagination, and if particular naming styles, suffixes and prefixes exist only in one division but not the other, then it gives us relevant historical information. If common elements with Mitanni and Avestan are found only in the later books, we’re forced to accept that in the early period these linguistic groups were unseparated.

As previously mentioned, Witzel criticises Talageri’s analysis on the straw-man grounds that it takes a chronology of the maṇḍalas as linear progression. For one, Talageri does not do this. But secondly, Witzel’s intellectual dishonesty is curiously problematic. He criticises Talageri’s reliance on anukramaṇīs when 1) he accepts that their data is part of the original Ṛgvedic tape-recording and 2) the anukramaṇīs are not salient to Talageri’s conclusions from internal chronology. In fact, the typical reputationist playbook that Witzel uses against any kind of out-of-India scenario is this:

1. Begin with discrediting the agenda. So such works are first declared indigenist or revisionist to imply that objectivity is compromised.
2. Discredit the author of that work. So Talageri is just a bank clerk who does not understand linguistics. Koenraad Elst’s understanding of philology is poor, and Nicholas Kazanas did not properly understand PIE reconstructions.
3. Engage in pedantic undermining, so that it becomes more pertinent whether we call it “Slavic,” “Slavonic” or “Balto-Slavic” than what the relevant conclusions are.
4. As a corollary of the above, establish one’s own supreme and complete expertise of the linguistic field.
5. Nitpick or make straw-man arguments that ignore the real points. So Talageri is criticised for using anukramaṇīs (though their data is accepted to be a part of the Ṛgveda) and Kazanas for misunderstanding Saptasaindhava. But no refutation is given of Talageri’s analysis through internal chronology, or Kazanas’ Preservation Principle.
6. Deny/dismiss/refute all non-linguistic arguments such as horses, fire-altars, Sarasvatī. The reputationist suddenly understands archaeology, geology and equid anthropology better than experts of those fields, all the while dismissing those who (allegedly) do not comprehend his own.
7. Falsify data, which Witzel did do in a notorious case of “Amāvasu went west.” He accepted it as an innocent error when challenged. Of course, when revisionists make errors it’s due to their agenda. When reputationists do they’re inadvertent. Witzel also claims that RV 7-33-1 to 7-33-3 indicate that Vasiṣṭha crossed the Sindhu from the west- thus indicating that he was a migrant into India. But anyone can check this. These verses are, figuratively, uttered by Indra. He says that Vasiṣṭha invited him here, across the Sindhu. But sindhu is used here in a general sense as river, and the river in question is later clarified as Yamunā. There are in fact no references to Sindhu in all of maṇḍala 7, and in any case it’s Indra who appears the migrant. Why would this not be used to support AIT instead, that Indra was a migrant into India? Doing so would have to refute Kazanas’ principle and explain why Indra hasn’t been preserved in his homelands.

Having considered all the above, the story of AIT- which occupies a fixed point in time and can be explored linguistically, textually and archaeologically- deserves to be discarded. For the purposes of this book, doing so allows us to give plausible histories to ancient India. A final word is called for by a relatively new entrant to the scene- genetics.