---
title: arjuna kartavirya 3100
sno: 51
---

Vedic literature makes no mention of Arjuna, and while he features prominently in the Purāṇas he is not in the original sixteen monarchs’ list of the Mahābhārata. There are good reasons for this. The Vedic period is yet to begin in earnest, and the bulk of Arjuna’s campaigns will focus away from the core geography where the Ṛgveda will eventually develop. Further, Arjuna’s campaigns throw the Gangetic Plains in disarray and the violence is indiscriminate towards the general populace, explaining why he does not feature popularly in folklore. Like Māndhātṛ many generations before him, Arjuna appears a vociferous war-monger, but unlike Māndhātṛ he is shown to be adhārmika. He battles brāhmins, northern kingdoms and southern kingdoms, all. His rivalry with Bhārgava ṛṣis indicates a shift in India’s social character of the time.

We’ve seen how BB Lal noted a three-fold division in Harappan cities, indicating the existence of social strata. It’s likely the vaiśya and śūdra classes emerged first, while brāhmin classes existed alongside and coalesced on their own trajectory. In the early tribes all adult male members would have been expected to pick up arms when needed, meaning that a separate kṣatriya class did not exist. But as society evolved and the specialisation of labour kicked in, so did a specialisation in war. These seems to have begun by Arjuna’s time, for his rivalry with Bhārgava ṛṣis is remembered in tradition as a great kṣatriya vs. brāhmin feud, which itself follows the brahmaṛṣi vs. rājaṛṣi rivalry of Vasiṣṭha and Viśvāmitra. We are told that by his time there’s an uneasy tension between the Haihayas and a group of Bhārgava ṛṣis under the tutelage of Jamadagni Bhārgava, Viśvāmitra’s nephew. Arjuna breaks from family tradition and appoints Dattātreya, an Atri ṛṣi, as his chief priest.

The prologue to Arjuna vs. Jamadagni begins with the former’s prior offences against brāhmins. We’re given an indication of his expansionary campaigns in a story where he allows Agni to feed upon the mountains and trees from any part of his kingdom. This could be an allegory to the clearing of forest land and establishment of mines, but equally could it reference the destruction that Haihayas wrought on enemy cities. The Narmadā-Godāvarī region will later supply copper to northern India, and its politico-cultural organisation is linked to the Haihayas. As Agni devours to his heart’s fill, he burns a forest containing the āśrama of a sage named Āpava. Holding Arjuna responsible, Āpava curses him to death at the hands of a certain Paraśurāma. Arjuna has already acquired a reputation, and the curse indicates a brāhmin grudge against him.

A story of Arjuna’s southern encounters tells us of the Deccan milieu in 3100 BC. The Tamil word ‘iraivan’ translates to ‘lord’ or ‘ruler’ and could be equated to the Saṃskṛtam rājan. But to northern Indians of that time the southern iraivans were known as Rāvaṇas. Rāvaṇa conquers all of southern India and camps along the Narmadā to worship the gods. Here he meets Arjuna, they battle, and Arjuna wins. He imprisons Rāvaṇa for a year and releases him at the behest of the latter’s father, Pulastya. This Rāvaṇa is clearly not the antagonist of the Rāmāyaṇa, for that story is many generations after Arjuna. Arjuna’s Rāvaṇa was a different southern iraivan, and later traditions confused the names to make it all one person- as they do in many cases. Historically, this tells us that southern India was by this time organising politically, though archaeologically it will remain Neolithic for a while as northern India marches into Bronze Age.

The Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa tells us of Arjuna’s campaigns against the Aikṣvākus. He is said to have fought Tṛyāruṇa, Hariścandra, Rohitaśva and Cancu. Of these the first three could have been his contemporaries, and the list indicates a generations-long rivalry between Haihayas and Aikṣvākus. Rohitaśva’s fortress-city could have been the result of Haihaya attacks on Ayodhyā. Arjuna’s ancestors have spent centuries battling Gangetic tribes, and he’s only carrying the family work forward. That the Haihayas trigger a massive power vacuum is confirmed by the list of cakravartins after Arjuna, where the next two emerge from the same eastern lands that form the thrust of Haihaya advances for the past few centuries.

The above stories encompass Arjuna’s rule, and tradition tells us he had a long reign where he conquered the entire world (the latter an exaggeration used for most monarchs). But a conflict seeded early in his life, in part emergent from past generations, returns to haunt him towards the end of his reign. Arjuna’s hostility with the Bhārgavas is not new, and Haihaya campaigns against Kāśī (which contributed to Bhārgava ṛṣis) would not have helped the matter. Late in his career his men come upon the āśrama of Jamadagni Bhārgava. The result of a clash here is the death of Jamadagni at the hands of Arjuna’s soldiers. Enter, Rāma Jamadāgneya, the son, who vows to avenge the death of his father. Tradition remembers him as Paraśurāma, or Rāma with an axe. He’s also considered an avatāra of Mahāviṣṇu, once again showing us the moral filter to Paurāṇika history. A brutal, destructive ruler like Arjuna was to be denounced, and thus was an avatāra needed.

The tale is of a vengeful son who trains himself to become a kṣatriya, and vows to destroy all kṣatriyas from the face of the planet. Note the full circle that happens in one family, no doubt a reference to the cultural situation of that era. Viśvaratha, a kṣatriya, becomes Viśvāmitra the rājaṛṣi to counter the growing influence of Vāsiṣṭha brāhmins. His grand-nephew, Paraśurāma, becomes a kṣatriya to check the expansion of Haihaya kṣatriyas. This incident, happening on the back of many centuries of Haihaya aggression, becomes in later tradition the myth of Paraśurāma wiping kṣatriyas from the earth twenty-one times. Historically, it represents a long period of conflict during which the brāhmins held a deep grudge towards the Haihayas. And Paraśurāma’s revenge becomes the brāhmin comeuppance of mythology. Tradition has him march to the gates of Mahiṣmatī and wage war on Arjuna, eventually beheading him and fulfilling sage Āpava’s curse. He also kills all of Arjuna’s sons- supporting the later exaggeration that he wiped out all kṣatriyas. The Haihayas have more mischief to conduct in coming generations, but for a while northern India can return to normalcy.

Shrikant Talageri points to an error in interpretation. He reads Paraśurama not as paraśu + rāma but as parśu + rāma. The difference is that while paraśu means axe, parśu is equivalent to ‘Persian’ as a geographic appellation. In the Ṛgveda the Parśus are a tribe that fight against the Pūru-Bhāratas. Talageri uses this to reaffirm his conclusion that the Bhārgavas were originally proto-Iranians who switched to the Vedic side after Jamadagni and his son- Paraśurāma, or the Persian Rāma. It’s important to note here that the Parśu tribe was initially proto-Iranian and placed in modern Punjab. Only later did its descendants migrate to Iran and emerge as Persians. So the claim that Jamadagni’s tribe was Parśu is not akin to claiming that it was Iranian.

Arjuna’s story does not take him to the Sindhu and Sarasvatī, where the pre-Harappan SSC matures under Pūru descendants, the Ānava kingdoms of Kekaya and Madra, and possibly a western Aikṣvāku line. We also have little to speculate on his southern activities, which only affirm the presence of iraivans or rājans archaeologically confirmed to be Neolithic. To the north-east, thrusting through the Yamunā to the Gaṅgā and its tributaries, Haihaya kingdoms around his time made inroads into Kāśī and Aikṣvāku lines. North of Māhiṣmatī in modern Rajasthan, Haihayas likely took control of sites like Balathal, Bagor and proto-Avanti under Arjuna’s reign. West of them were the Nāgas of Kuśasthalī, who will soon fall to the growing Yādava power. Each cakravartin sets in motion a new chain of events, and each consequently owes something to the one before him. Power vacuums that one cakravartin creates are exploited in a few generations by ambitious men from other dynasties. Arjuna too arose in a vacuum created by his own ancestors, itself triggered by Māndhātṛ’s campaigns. In turn, the power gap he creates in the Gangetic Plains will be exploited by the next cakravartin, Marutta Āvikṣita.

We can bring back here our nested model of yugas and manvantaras. The current major mahāyuga cycle began in 11502 BC, following which Dvāpara Yuga commenced from 4302 BC. Within this major Yuga the birth of Vaivasvat commenced a nested minor Satya Yuga. Paurāṇika tradition maintains that this Satya Yuga ends with the death of Arjuna Kārtavīrya, but the Tretā Yuga is yet to begin. In this brief interlude, and the power gap Arjuna created in the Gangetic Plains, we will see the rise of the next cakravartin.