---
title: aryan invasion/migration
sno: 4
---

Simply put, what the Aryan Invasion Theory (AIT) claims is this: After 2000 BC, a tribe or tribes of Indo-European language speakers (a precursor to Saṃskṛtam) invaded/migrated into India, bringing with them Saṃskṛtam and the Vedic culture. This claim has a number of implications attached to it. One, it implies that there exists an indigenous vs. invader divide in India, such that some of us are ādivāsi (original inhabitant) while others are not. Two, it implies that there exists a Dravidian vs. Aryan divide, roughly dividing India into a north and a south. Three, it implies that Vedic culture and religion are foreign imports, meaning we should not begrudge overmuch the ravages of later foreign cultures, nor claim nativity to our own traditions.

Refuting such a theory and these claims is not an act of nationalistic chauvinism. One should have no aversion to accepting this theory and necessary implications, if but they were true. Any attempts to refute the theory are labelled ‘indigenist’ or ‘revisionist,’ implying that such attempts are agenda-driven from the outset and further- that the existing paradigm is the result of objective, non-dogmatic methodology. In fact, if attempts to refute AIT are revisionist, we must remember that any dogmatic dismissal of this is ‘reputationist.’ Decades of careers, university positions, book deals and reputations have been built on the AIT (and its receding successors). If refuting it is a revisionist act, surely dismissing revisions is a reputationist act. In a world where students can access any information on the internet instantly, a reputationist must work doubly hard to keep his position secure. Another ruling paradigm is the invasionist/migrationist one, which sees all cultural changes as the result of intrusions or influx from outside. This is a necessary paradigm for a culture that’s own expansion has been based on it, for it not to have cognitive dissonance.

In reality only the truth matters. It’s of no consequence what one’s agenda is, if the truth can stand on its own. This is why when even non-Indians have approached the problem without reputationist concerns, they’ve found compelling reasons to either refute AIT or to argue for variations of an out-of-India model (Colin Renfrew, Michel Danino, Alexander Semenenov, Igor Tonoyan-Belyayev, Nicholas Kazanas, Koenraad Elst to name a few). There is a partly jocular rule when it comes to the AIT. The rule is that the original Indo-European homeland tends to be close to the author’s native land. On this count I must disclaim- I was born in Benaras, and for millennia my ancestors have dwelt on the Gaṅgā’s banks, though I personally haven’t. Clearly I am motivated and could be possessed of a chauvinistic agenda. But let’s see what the truth says about itself.

Of the many mysteries to human origins, perhaps the most baffling is language. Unlike the wheel or agriculture, we cannot find archaeological ‘evidence’ for language origin, and till the advent of writing we have little to go on in visualising human speech and communication. Some like Noam Chomsky attribute language to a chance mutation that occurred in our ancestors at a single point in time. Others like Steven Pinker are inclined towards a continuum, where language emerged from precursors among our primate ancestors. Also unlike the wheel or agriculture, which are known to have emerged multiple times across different populations, linguists favour a single-origin model of language. This makes sense given that we link language to genetics, and the work of Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza does show that “*the family tree relating human populations corresponds to another relating the languages of the world*.” The correlation is not a congruence however, and linguist George Driem cautions that “*linguistic ancestors are not the same set of people as genetic ancestors*.”

A specific protein called FOXP2 is commonly called the language gene, because of its association with the development of speech and language in humans. The gene appears in many vertebrates, and in birds it drives birdsong while in bats it’s behind echolocation. We know that Neanderthals too possessed this gene, but that other genes are also necessary for human language development. Yet the association of FOXP2 with language reflects the intuition of a single origin of language. This intuition is reflected in the Judeo-Christian myth of the Tower of Babel, where the human survivors of a great flood originally speak the same language, but are then scattered around the world by God, their speech confounded such that they no longer understand each other. We now know that such myths are grounded in reality, and by the 18th century AD European linguists had conceptualised an Uralic language family which linked Finnish, Estonian, Hungarian and other languages together. Thus both mythical paradigm and scientific precedence were well established when the Europeans first discovered Saṃskṛtam.

Yet Saṃskṛtam opened the doors like they’d never been before. In its archaic preservation, in its immaculate structure as presented by Pāṇini, its deep study of grammar, syntax and pronunciation- Saṃskṛtam was a key that unlocked the whole field of linguistics. Linguistic terms that put off the lay reader- gutturals, retroflexes, labio-velars and others- are but how Saṃskṛtam and subsequent Indian languages have always presented and organised their alphabet. The study of Saṃskṛtam helped early linguists map language inter-relationships to a hitherto unprecedented degree, birthing an entire field called Comparative Linguistics (CL). Prior to this there was no systematic grammar, no formal understanding of language. But after CL emerged filial relationships between language groups- Celtic, Italic, Germanic, Baltic, Slavonic, Albanian, Greek, Anatolian, Armenian, Tocharian, Iranian and Indo-Aryan. Of these, the last two are groups where the term Aryan is attested. It’s contained in the very name of Iran, and in India it first appeared in the Ṛgveda as ārya. Indo-Aryan is not called Indic to avoid confusion with other Indian language families such as Dravidian.

It was established through the work of successive linguists that these language groups descended from a common mother language, called proto-Indo-European (PIE). And the groups themselves are now referred to as the Indo-European (IE) language family. More than 40% of modern humans speak a language from this family, making it the single largest language group by far. This makes consequent questions all the more important, for they have deep implications in the history of humanity. If a language such as PIE existed, where did it exist? Who spoke it? When was it spoken? And in what way did it disperse from this original homeland to all the regions where its descendants are now extant? Notice the assumptions built into such questions. We assume that the moment in time represented by PIE also represents origins for all the culture, religion and lifestyle possessed by PIE-speaking people. In other words, PIE is implicitly taken not just as a mother-language but a mother-culture. But if Vedic culture- described by Saṃskṛtam- is inherited from PIE, what proves that PIE culture wasn’t inherited from its own mother language? The search for a PIE homeland is in fact Western civilisation’s search for its ultimate roots.

If we place the PIE homeland within India, our speculations can be clubbed as the out-of-India theory (OIT). If we place the homeland, as is usually done, anywhere outside India, the theory by definition is that of Aryan Invasion (AIT). We won’t involve ourselves with academic sophistry that modifies AIT as a model of Aryan migration instead. The necessary implication of AIT, that Vedic culture and Saṃskṛtam were brought to India from outside, mandates that this happened through a kind of dominance. We should keep in mind that AIT was formulated well before the discovery of Harappan civilisation, and the latter’s discovery first prompted images of chariot-riding Aryans destroying peaceful Harappan cities. When no evidence of this invasion was found, the Aryan arrival was dated to follow the Harappan demise such that a small, foreign population somehow managed to establish its language and culture over a demographic heavyweight shifting its base from Sindhu-Sarasvatī to Gaṅgā-Yamunā. Everything that such models imply requires a domination/invasion, and cannot be achieved by peaceful migration. Both in any case are untenable and without evidence. Throughout this book, when we say AIT we refer to the gamut of invasion/ migration/ trickling-in/ peaceful-resettlement/ touring theories that all nevertheless imply the same things.

A refutal of AIT is not predicated upon refuting PIE itself. While there are conceptual problems with CL, let’s accept the basic linguistic implication that Saṃskṛtam is a sister language to the other IE languages- not a mother. This means that Saṃskṛtam was not PIE but an equal descendant of it, even if more archaic or closer to the original. In our examination of AIT we’ll stick to the facts of the case, and it need not be important what the motivations of early Europeans were. Some like Voltaire had no problem admitting to Indian antiquity and civilisational greatness. Others like Muller viewed all things Indian through a narrow Christian lens. We will of course have to consider the motivations of modern reputationists, for they form the dam (with deepening cracks) that holds back true narratives of Indian history. The current IE situation is best expressed by Michel Danino in his paper ‘The Indo-European Cloudland’:

“*Although the Indo-European (IE) homeland theory has taken many forms and colours, it rests on the central assumption of an isolated, single proto-language in an isolated, single homeland, from which, at some point in time, Proto-Indo-European (PIE) people burst out in almost every direction to sow their linguistic seeds. But no one knows for sure where, when, why or how: after two centuries of intensive studies and often acrimonious debates, Indo-Europeanists cannot agree on the particular homeland or the date of the great dispersal*.”

It’s pertinent to note that the PIE and AIT theories are linguistic at heart. Indeed, linguists insist that questions on PIE and its homeland can be answered by linguistics alone. Another way to put this is that “pots don’t speak.” Which means that archaeology can tell us nothing about the languages of people, their origins or their dispersals. While AIT in India need be discussed in the contexts of textual, archaeological, genetic and astronomical evidence as well, let us consider the linguistic first. If linguists are right about the primacy of their field in settling the debate, the following section should suffice to establish OIT.