---
title: validity of astronomy
sno: 16
---

A simple way to understand astronomical information is to consider it as timestamps. Except where modern timestamps tell us the coordinates in date, hours, minutes and seconds, astronomical timestamps tell us the coordinates in terms of the placement of celestial bodies in the sky. The ancient people were far more diligent astronomers than we of the modern era are, perhaps also because the night sky was the only ‘black mirror’ for them to spend their time on. Encoded throughout Vedic and Paurāṇika literature are astronomical timestamps- information that tells us precisely where in the sky select celestial bodies were at the time of recording. Take the example of Halley’s Comet, which appears once every 76 years. If I state that an event occurred under Halley’s Comet, then one can arrive at a few dates, spaced 76 years apart, as plausible candidates for this event. If I add to this information on where the Sun was, where certain constellations were, and where a few other key celestial bodies were, then the researcher can whittle down the list and arrive at one plausible date where all these bodies were exactly in the position described, and this becomes the date of that recorded event.

With Halley’s Comet’s relatively small periodicity of 76 years, back-dating is easy. If I know when it last appeared, I can calculate the dates of its previous many occurrences. Then, if I am of a fraudulent mind, I can use an old date as timestamp for a current event and thereby back-date the event into antiquity. This however is not possible with the kind of astronomical information available in literature. That information includes several different bodies with periodicities running into thousands of years. Backdating under this configuration is possible only through modern computers and information on periodicities. To claim that ancient people could backdate their timestamps requires us to either posit that they too had computers, or that they had unimaginably enormous mental abilities- both of which require extraordinary evidence to assert. The simpler conclusion is that these ancient people did actually record the timestamps.

There is thus a mountain of evidence to assert that the tradition of recording timestamps during important events has deep antiquity in India. Timestamps extracted from the Ṛgveda, Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa and other texts have yielded dates as far back as 17000 BC and 22000 BC. Sheer incredulity is not enough to dismiss the hardness of scientific data. Such dates prove that an ancient astronomer was indeed alive in 17000 BC to diligently record the night sky, that he taught it to his son or students, that for reasons we can only guess the timestamp was transmitted across several generations, and that it was eventually incorporated into a text 15,000 years later. A caveat here on subconscious assumptions. It may well have been a matriarch and consequent grandmothers who maintained such lines of transmission.

But as exact a science astronomy is, as specialised is astronomical knowledge and thus out of reach for even an expert linguist, historian and archaeologist. And the small body of people who have looked to Indian texts with the gaze of an expert astronomer has produced varying dates even for key events such as the Mahābhārata. One key date is well attested in literature. A specific timestamp mentions the conjunction of seven planets (Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, Sun and Moon) and Ketu (the southern lunar node) near a fixed star Revatī (Zeta Piscium) on 18th February, 3102 BC. Āryabhaṭa considered this timestamp to mark the advent of Kali Yuga, and in the Mahābhārata this is the date Kṛṣṇa breathed his last. It’s undoubtable that such a reading of the night sky was indeed made on 18th February, 3102 BC. But how are we to be sure Kṛṣṇa actually died that day, or that the Kali Yuga of some astronomical tradition did indeed begin?

This is the problem of timestamp-transmissions. Let’s imagine that a timestamp was recorded in 5000 BC as a marker for, say, the birth of Vaivasvat Manu. This timestamp accurately and honestly records the night sky configuration for that date in 5000 BC. The timestamp is 5000 BC, and the event is the birth of Vaivasvat. Imagine further that this information in transmitted over generations such that, in 3000 BC, an unscrupulous scholar knows of it as he writes down a story of his ancestors. In his story he records that his grandfather was born at the timestamp of 5000 BC. Now the timestamp is 5000 BC, but the event is the birth of this scholar’s grandfather. The information encoded in the 5000 BC timestamp is accurate, but it’s been deliberately used for a much later date in this example. So when we read the story as “my grandfather was born under this timestamp,” we’ll conclude that the said grandfather was born in 5000 BC. But in reality it was Vaivasvat who was born at that date. Despite the scientific accuracy of astronomical data, we thus have to be careful in how we use it. It’s for these reasons that dates taking the Rāmāyaṇa to the 13th millennium BC, for example, are absurd from outset, not considering for the wealth of archaeological and material refutation also available.