---
title: bhagiratha aikshvaku 2900
sno: 56
---

Like Sagara, the dynastic founder, Bhagīratha finds no mention in Vedic literature. But like Sagara again, he’s a celebrated hero in the Purāṇas. Bhagin is a Saṃskṛtam word for prosperous or fortunate, and ratha in this context is the spiritual chariot of one’s own mind. Bhagīratha thus translates as ‘he with a prosperous mind.’ In his real life he disappeared to his people for many long years, and the gap was used by later chroniclers to insert a different lesson. It reflects to us the religious milieu of the early 3rd millennium BC, and in its turning of the mind inward it represents a tradition separate to core Vedic ritualism. Behind this cultural strand are the Aikṣvāku spiritual preceptors, the Vāsiṣṭhas.

They are the teachers that Bhagīratha learns under, their worldview containing the seed of later philosophical traditions such as the Buddhist and Jain- both of which link themselves to the Aikṣvāku dynasty. Bhagīratha’s life exemplifies many values later considered ideal by Buddha and Mahāvīra, and in fact carries strands of classical Hinduism such as devotion and penance. The traditional account of his life is such- distraught at his failure to fulfil the directive of his ancestors, to return the ashes of Sagara’s 60,000 sons to their homeland, Bhagīratha undertakes severe penance that lasts hundreds of years. At the end of this, pleased with his devotion, the goddess Gaṅgā grants him a boon. This is the Ākāśa Gaṅgā, the intangible Gaṅgā of the Sky, a veritable Deity. He requests her to return to the earth, to wash over his ancestors’ ashes.

But Gaṅgā reminds him of her power, of the sheer force with which she would land. So Bhagīratha begins his penance again, and after hundreds of years elapse he gains the pleasure of Śiva, who grants him a boon too. Śiva relents to accepting Gaṅgā on his head, where his matted hair will dampen her flow and allow her to land on earth gracefully. This is the Hema Gaṅgā, the sheet of snow covering Meru, the great Pamir Knot from which flow all the rivers of the then-known world. From the lap of Śiva at mount Kailāsa the great river falls into the Himālaya, where it takes the name of Bhāgīrathī in honour of the one who brought her here. But strong indeed is her flow, and she initially wipes out the āśrama of sage Jahnu, who swallows her up. Bhagīratha must make one last propitiation, and when Jahnu finally releases her the river is called Jahnāvī, which is how she will be remembered in the Ṛgveda. Free at last, she flows as the Gaṅgā across the ashes of Bhagīratha’s ancestors, the 60,000 sons of Sagara.

Bhagīratha’s myth is an expedition tale. His ‘hundreds of years’ of penance refer to the many years it would have taken him to explore the Himālaya and Meru, to find the ultimate source of the Gaṅgā. The description of this is in vivid detail. From Śiva’s hair (Meru) Gaṅgā first falls into Pātāla (Tibet/Mount Kailāsa), from where Śiva lifts her up and deposits her in the Himālaya. From this great range she falls into Bhāratavarṣa, where she runs south before turning east from the middle. Running east for a long distance she turns south again and eventually meets the ocean. In the northern end she is called Bhāgīrathī, in the southern she is Gautamī. In this the Gaṅgā is at first metaphysical, the Ākāśa Gaṅgā. She is then a geological composite, the Hema Gaṅgā that is the mother of all rivers. Finally she is Bhāgīrathī and Gautamī, named after the men who ‘brought’ her to Bhāratavarṣa.

But Bhagīratha gets greater prominence because his discovery likely involved engineering as well. His will is said to have carved mountains, forcing God (Śiva) to yield Goddess (Gaṅgā) to him. This wasn’t without collateral damage. The Gaṅgā’s northern parts were inhabited by the Kanyākubjas, descendants of Jahnu. Their dynasty broken by Haihayas, their small towns were subject to flooding once the Gaṅgā returned to its erstwhile flow. The Gaṅgā’s tributary Sarayū also originates near mount Kailāsa, and the generations-long effort started by Sagara could have involved the digging of canals and channels to ensure both- 1) perennial rivers that supported farming and irrigation, and 2) stable streams less susceptible to flooding.

Support for this comes in the flowering of organised agriculture in the Gangetic Plains in the following centuries. Already accustomed to wetland rice cultivation for many millennia, by the mid 3rd millennium BC we see a variety of barley, wheat, rice, lentils and beans being cultivated all-round the year. Under an Aryan invasion/migration scenario, the Gaṅgā myth is interpreted as Bhagīratha leading the Aikṣvākus to the Gangetic Plains. Thus, he does not bring the Gaṅgā to earth but rather brings his people to the Gaṅgā. Apart from the inherent problems with AIT, this interpretation has to explain why Sagara, Bhagīratha and their immediate descendants do not feature in the Ṛgveda if they were a part of the invading Aryans!