--- 
title: bharata daushyanti 2950
sno: 61
---

Placed somewhere around 2950 BC, Bharata emerges at a critical period from an AIT and Ṛgvedic point of view. Using the broad PIE dispersal model of Talageri and Tonoyan-Belyayev, we know that the first wave was in 3700-3300 BC, when proto-Anatolian and proto-Tocharian dispersed from the homeland. This is necessarily connected with the campaigns of Śaśabindu and Māndhātṛ in our chronology, and more generally with the early period of pañcajana and Aikṣvāku conflicts. The second wave in 3300-2600 BC led to the dispersal of proto-Italic, proto-Celtic, proto-Germanic, proto-Baltic and proto-Slavic. It began with the reign of Sivi Auśinara, but it finds greater expression under the dynasty that descends from Bharata.

Consensus also favours the period 3500-2500 BC as the primary Ṛgvedic period. Consensus is not necessarily an authority, and astronomical data not just in the Ṛgveda but all Vedic literature suggests a deep antiquity and continuity, at least to methodical star-gazing. But if we are to date the Ṛgveda in consonance with evidence from archaeology and linguistics, then the 4th and 3rd millennia BC appear the best fit. Paurāṇika literature is confused about the origin of the name Bhāratavarṣa. Within the same Purāṇa we find at one place the claim it originated from Bharata the son of Ṛṣabha- the first Jain tīrthaṅkara, and at another that it comes from Bharata the son of Duṣyanta. Giving primacy to Ṛgvedic evidence requires that we favour the second view- that it were Bharata Dauṣyanti’s descendants who first called their land Bhāratavarṣa. This does not exclude the possibility that Indians in the Gangetic Plains ran with the name because it mapped to a known figure in their own histories, Bharata the son of Ṛṣabha. Such is a maṇḍala further enmeshed.

Information on Bharata’s imperial career is non-existent. We can only conclude that he carried forward the work begun by his father, and also that it was not carried too far in his lifetime. Hastināpura is mentioned at places as his capital, but the city’s founder Hastina is Bharata’s descendant by a few generations. We are told that he had three wives and many sons, but that the sons were wicked and disappointed their father, so the mothers killed them all. To continue his line he adopts a Bārhaspatya and renames him Vidathin, from whom descend the later Bhāratas. These are all curious discontinuities. Bharata’s descent from Duṣyanta appears suspect to begin with, and tradition confesses that the father took time accepting it. And Bharata’s own bloodline ends at soon as it begins, compelling him to adopt from the Bṛhaspati clan. This arguably represents a principle opposite to the one operating among Sāgaras, where primogeniture has been dominant for generations. A product of suspicion over inheritance and lineage, Bharata decides that merit ought to confer the right to rule, and chooses an adopted son over his own blood.

Pargiter shows that Vidathin is likely a grandson or great-grandson of Bṛhaspati. This is evidenced by the early Āṅgirasa family tree, where to Uśija are born Ucathya, Bṛhaspati and Saṁvarta. These are contemporaneous to Marutta Āvikṣita a century before Bharata’s time. To Ucathya is born Dīrghatamās and to Bṛhaspati is born the first Bārhaspatya, whose son is Vidathin. Dīrghatamās may have been named Gotama later in life, or Gotama was his son or grandson. Evidence suggests Dīrghatamās lived a long life, and as an old man was present at Bharata’s coronation. He’s also linked to the rise of the Aṅga kingdom after Bali, and to the charting of the Gaṅgā’s southern bends. Pargiter concludes that to Bharata, Dīrghatamās offers his nephew Vidathin, the son of Bṛhaspati. Thus are merged a kṣatriya line and a brāhmin line, and begins a hereditary culture with increasing specialisation in hymnology and ritual. Note that parallely, among the Sāgaras and Haihayas, will emerge various conflicts between kṣatriya and brāhmin.

Sites like Balathal, Baror, Mohenjodaro and Nausharo appear on the archaeological record by 3000 BC, indicating a vast civilisation and flourishing regionalisation. The period marks a transition from early to mature Harappan states, and surely developments take place in what will emerge a few centuries hence as the Indus script. Why did the nation eventually get Bharata’s name? Why is he remembered as a cakravartin? If our chronology is correct, his is the dynasty that ushers in elements of mature town planning, weights and measures, writing and long distance trade. A second Pṛthu in the annals of Indian civilisation, his empire brings the Ravi phase culture into unison with Sothi-Siswal, and together they are brought into contact with Ahar-Banas further south. It’s also important to remember at this stage that names like Bhārata and Sāgara begin to represent dynastic lineages more and tribal populations less. When we say that the Bhāratas ushered in mature SSC, we mean that they formed the primary ruling class over a multi-ethnic Indian populace.

Tradition is ambiguous on the line immediately following Bharata, which makes sense if he did indeed drive practices away from primogeniture. To his adopted son Vidathin is born Bhuvamanyu, and to him are born the sons Bṛhatkṣatra and Nara. Bṛhatkṣatra’s descendant is Hastina who establishes Hastināpura, and through him continues the primary Bhārata line. But a detour is merited in the line of Nara, whose grandson Rantideva is celebrated as a cakravartin.