---
title: the bharata lineage
sno: 59
---

We jump back in time six centuries to 3000 BC, to a young royal looking to revive his dynasty along the upper reaches of the Yamunā and Sarasvatī rivers. His lineage of Pūrus has waned in the generations since Māndhātṛ’s campaigns in 3650 BC, and Pūru descendants such as Kaṇva and Medhatithi became ṛṣis instead. The period between 3500 BC and 3000 BC is one of both churn and progress in northern India. In modern Pakistan and Punjab the period is characterised as Early Harappan, and more specifically as the Ravi Phase- named since the primary city, Harappa, was found along the Ravi river (Irāvatī). Precipitated under Ānava leadership since Sivi Auśinara in 3300 BC, it forms the first nexus of culture that the young Pūru royal and his descendants will eventually yoke into civilisation proper.

South of Harappa, along the flourishing Sarasvatī-Dṛṣadvatī river system, is the Sothi-Siswal culture that found roots during Yayāti’s expansions in 4000 BC. This is the great Pūru homeland, and even if its royal lineages have been broken, the Pūru people and culture have survived through the centuries. More than the Gaṅgā, it’s the Sarasvatī that’s been home to early ṛṣis and composers of what later will be compiled into the Ṛgveda. Flourishing in cities like Kalibangan, Bhirrana, Rakhigarhi, Sothi, Siswal, Banawali and more, this is a culture given to fire-rituals, and an appreciation of cattle and natural phenomena.

Further south in modern Rajasthan develops the Ahar-Banas culture, currently in a state of early Chalcolithic. This culture too has deep roots, for modern Bagor 110 kms north of Balathal was a prehistoric Mesolithic site, and as Mṛtikāvaṭī in 3000 BC it was home to Haihaya Yādavas. Beginning from two centuries ago under Arjuna Kārtavīrya, the Haihayas (and their Yādava cousins) have emerged as a dominant power in central India- the third nexus of culture- and arguably covering the largest territory. Though archaeologically unattested, tradition suggests that proto-settlements for later Avanti, Vidiśā, Śāhañjanī, Kuṇḍina and Vidarbha are already in place. As is Māhiṣmatī, the grand Haihaya capital that was Arjuna’s seat. To their west in modern Gujarat is Kuśasthalī, for now still a Nāga city. This vast conglomerate is peopled mostly by hill and cave tribes, kindred to those that emerged from the Mesolithic at sites like Bagor and Bhimbetka. They are the ones experimenting with metallurgy, and at least one Bhārgava line (Cyavana’s) is from these regions.

There are of course other cultures too. In the Gangetic Plains proto-OCP will rise under the Sāgara dynasty, but the twin forests of Naimiṣāraṇya and Kurū Jāṅgala (named in anticipation of a later dynasty) will keep them aloof to the Sarasvatī for now, and vice versa. There is culture in the deep south as well, but that too will not encounter Sindhu-Sarasvatī for another few centuries. Finally, there is culture on the Sindhu’s southern reaches, likely peopled by Sivi’s descendants and a mixture of Druhyu and proto-Iranian tribes. These are the people of Kot Diji and Amri, of Chanhudaro and Mohenjodaro. They are not unfamiliar to imperial ambitions radiating from inner-India, and their fortified cities and connectivity to the mountain passes will continue to make them appealing for conquest.

The Purāṇas tell us that it’s during such a period when young Duṣyanta, son of Ilinā and a Pūru descendant, is able to wring together a kingdom. He’s placed first in the upper reaches of Yamunā and Dṛṣadvatī, hinting that he emerges from obscurity and not from the urban nexus of Kalibangan or Rakhigarhi. This makes sense if we imagine what happened to royal Pūru lines during the campaigns of Śaśabindu and Māndhātṛ. We also must be honest in conceding that over such long periods, the continuity suggested in genealogy might not really be true. Though the Purāṇas are unanimous in calling Duṣyanta a Pūru, he could have made the claim simply for legitimacy. In his book The Land of Seven Rivers, Sanjeev Sanyal shows how Indian dynasties from the time of Aśoka have used his symbols and motifs, to allude to continuity and legacy. In the age before writing and before major architecture, bloodline connections would have been the only way to make such allusions.

As a young prince, Duṣyanta is out on a hunt and comes upon the āśrama of ṛṣi Kaṇva on the Mālinī river. This is the first historical appearance of a Kāṇva in our narrative, but to Pargiter this ṛṣi was a Kāśyapa and Kaṇva was only his first name. The actual Kāṇva founder would emerge much later in this interpretation. Either way the tradition is well remembered, for the Mālinī river goes by this name even today, and a 20 minute drive north from modern Bijnor brings one to an āśrama that’s named after Mahāṛṣi Kaṇva or Māladeva (lord of Mālinī). Here Duṣyanta was met by the sight of Śakuntalā, daughter of a Viśvāmitra, and the two promptly fell in love. They engaged in what tradition calls a gāndharva vivāha, which modern parlance translates as ‘love marriage.’ More likely that gāndharva vivāhas were amoral and willing dalliances between men and women, a situation the early manvantaras were replete with. But tradition immortalises the love between Duṣyanta and Śakuntalā, best expressed in Kalidāsa’s play Abhijñānaśākuntalā. Duṣyanta departs after a brief affair but hands Śakuntalā a signet ring, and promises to return to her after his empire is built.

Śakuntalā gives birth to the young Sarvadamana, who grows up in Kaṇva’s āśrama till the ṛṣi decides he must go to his father. A bit of contention follows, where Duṣyanta at first denies any affair, and thus his parentage of Sarvadamana. Śakuntalā on her part has lost the ring he’d given her and is unable to prove her claim. But memory eventually returns to Duṣyanta, and he celebrates the young Sarvadamana as his son and heir-apparent. The father has by this time carved a fair kingdom for himself in the upper Yamunā-Sarasvatī, but the son is to carry the task forward handsomely. Named Bharata by his father, he is the next great cakravartin in ancient India’s history. With Bharata and his dynasty begins the Ṛgvedic period proper. Not that many proto-Vedic hymns and practices aren’t already in place, but that the Vedic structure and organisation, the primary books or maṇḍalas, and formal organisation to Vedic literature takes shape during this period. It’s best therefore to take a detour and elaborate the chronology, authorship and composition of the Ṛgveda.