---
title: brahma and the origin
sno: 20
---

There exists an insurmountable gap to human knowledge- we parse the world causally. One thing leads to another, and through perception of such causal lines we come to understand the world as it exists. But all lines of knowledge reach an upper limit, a point where positing further causality only leads to a recursive loop. Science thought it explained this away through the idea of the Big Bang, a singular moment pre-time through which originates all of reality. But not even a profound understanding of the mathematics behind this can alleviate sheer curiosity- what happened before the Big Bang? To say that space and time did not exist before it, and that therefore the question is mathematically meaningless, does nothing for existential human curiosity. Thus physics itself reaches a stage where this universe is part of an infinite cycle of creation and destruction. Our Big Bang was but the end of another universe, infinitely more bubbling up around ours, and one day ours will end in a Big Crunch that seeds yet another universe. But the curious human still asks- why does this entire chain of infinite creation-destruction exist in the first place?

Can the question ever be answered? To say that God did it prevents not even a child from asking- who created God in the first place? There exists, by the inherent limits of human perception, a primal cause- the Uncaused Cause. Beyond this our questions are philosophically useless, for we must either accept an Uncaused Cause or be eternally lost in a recursive loop of causality. Whether we were created by the Big Bang, by God, or by an Alien Simulation, we will always ask- what exists before Creation? Elon Musk, who supports a simulation hypothesis, famously declared that his primal curiosity is- “*What lies outside the simulation*?” Modern science defines reality, as writer Philip Dick did, as “*that which does not go away when you stop believing in it*.” This makes laws like gravitation objectively real, and disbelievers are frequently invited to question it by jumping out a third-storey window. But ancient Indians defined reality as “*that which does not go away, period*,” which is a subtle but significant difference. Even this universe, with all of its objective laws, will one day reduce to non-existence. It will go away, period, and thus it’s as unreal as anything else transient. Only an Uncaused Cause, a phenomena self-existent, can save us from a recursive loop. Later Indian thought, expressed best in the Upaniṣads, called this primal cause Brahmaṇ, the real and the permanent. That which not only remains regardless of human belief/discovery, but also remains eternal, period.

But early Indian thought, if the Purāṇas are any indication, thought of this phenomena anthropomorphically. As Brahmā, the self-born. The one who sprang from the navel of reality through the principle of Causality- as nothing can happen without it. He is the First Cause, the Uncaused Cause, and the Svāyam Bhu- Self Born. He is not a historic figure, but he is the realisation by early Indians that an inherent creative principle lay behind the world as they knew it. As humans are wont to do, they imagined this principle as a larger version of themselves, possessed of mentality and sapience as they were but also of superhuman abilities they lacked. He was called Brahmā, and in the beginning he was alone.

This anthropic interpretation was not the result of primitive thinking. There exists a controversial psychological hypothesis called the Bicameral Mind. It argues that ancient humanity’s mind was initially split in two, in a state akin to schizophrenia, where it was not yet aware of its own thought processes. Julian Jaynes theorised that humans were bicameral as recently as 3,000 years ago, and that they thought the voices in their heads to be Gods commanding them. The theory is highly controversial and has never found mainstream support, but behind it lies an important intuition. All mammals are sentient creatures but only our species is sapient- self aware and capable of understanding the subjectivity of its experience. The transition from sentience to sapience, whether a singular switch or a long continuum, represents humanity becoming aware of itself. The emergence of ego and true consciousness. Brahmā is the symbolic first man who gazed into the abyss. The self born, i.e. the first to become self-aware. He is both what gazes and what gazes back. What listens and what is heard. Both It and Not It. Both Brahmā and Abraham. The two parts of the bicameral mind become whole, the first true human consciousness.

The self-born, the self-existent, he desired to create and play. From his mind he produced offspring, first the Kumāras Sanaka, Sananda, Sanat and Sanātana. Brahmā asked them to go forth and reproduce, to populate all of creation such that he would never be alone again. But these mind-born sons, themselves endowed with deep mentality, wished instead to explore the inner universe and dedicated themselves to meditation. So Brahmā produced more sons, each a thinker in his own right- Rudra, Marīcī, Atri, Aṅgira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Krātu, Bhṛgu, Vasiṣṭha, Dakṣa, Nārada and Kardama. Then came a daughter, Vāc or Speech. This forms the earliest layer of Paurāṇika tradition, and sheds light on human protohistory. The tale of Brahmā and his earliest generation is a memory of the evolution of consciousness and consequently of language, or speech. In an exaggerated interpretation, Brahmā and his first progeny were the first modern human tribe with consciousness and language. They represent the turning of the human mind inwards, to existential questions on mentality and the nature of consciousness. There was a time when humanity first looked at the mirror and realised that its own reflection stared back, and later humans remembered this seminal event in their ancestors’ lives.

Brahmā asks these sons to procreate, but they remind him that they need mates. Finally he creates the prototypical Adam and Eve- Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā. Their five children are ancestors to all of early humanity. This marks the emergence of Indian civilisation from the shadows of protohistory, the first establishment of a culture that maintained records and passed them down the generations. At the ultimate level all of humanity does indeed spring from a common source, and from the depths of this memory emerges something remotely historical. In other accounts Brahmā creates directly the four primary groups of beings- Devas, Asuras, Pitṛs and Mānavas. We get a different etymology of these names in such accounts. Born of Brahmā’s effulgent divinity, or the root word div, the Devas are so named. Born of his breath, or asu, do the Asuras get their name. And born of his mind, or mānas, are the Mānavas. These groups are born in the cosmic waters, or ambhas, and some beings resolve to protect ambhas while others wish to devour it. Those given to protection, or rakṣā, are called Rākṣasas while those given to destruction, or kṣi, are called Yakṣas. Also born through Brahmā are Bhūtas, Piśācas, Gandharvas, birds, goats, sheep, cows, horses, donkeys, oxen, deer, camels, boards, dogs, elephants, predators, medical herbs, plants, creepers, fruits and roots. Not for nothing is Brahmā considered the creative aspect in Hindu trinity.

Interestingly, some Purāṇas give a list of domesticated animals and add humankind to the list- cows, goats, sheep, horses, mules, donkeys and humans. This contains not only the memory of a wild existence, but also the wisdom of how in settling down and relying on agriculture humanity had domesticated its own self. We are given elaborate details of this domestication. Humans first lived among trees and relied on them for subsistence, deriving fruits, sap, clothing and housing. Then they made settlements in inaccessible mountains and caves, using the earth’s natural contours for habitation and protection. As they emerged from this existence they began to subsist on vegetation, wild grains and beans of all kind. Settlements grew larger and towns came into being. Units of measurement were then created, not only to map territories but also for trade. Eventually the earth was tilled- cereals, seeds, rice and barley were domesticated along with animals and humankind. In the fully fledged urban state there existed four kinds of settlements- 1) grāmas, or purely agricultural habitations where the owners of land tilled their fields; 2) ākrimis, which were grāmas where the owners of the fields and their tillers were different people; 3) vasatis, cosmopolitan settlements abundant with traders and businesspeople from all over and 4) ghoṣas, pseudo-settlements of wandering pastoralists and herdsmen. Starting from the proto-historical, this paints a clear picture of moving from a Palaeolithic existence to a Neolithic and urban one. The historically relevant stories begin with Brahmā’s son and daughter, Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā. But where in time could we place them?