---
title: brhaspatis and more fractals in the mandala
sno: 53
---

Mythology tells us that Bṛhaspati was a son of Aṅgira, and that he was chief priest to the Ādityas in prehistory and to Bhāratas in later history. In Key to Interpret the Veda, RR Bhagawat offers a different explanation. He reads Bṛhaspati as the chief or ‘pati’ of the Bṛhas/Bṛhat tribe of people. This tribe, in his interpretation, was a fire-worshipping tribe that initially aligned itself with the Ādityas under Indra. Since Bṛhaspati is often called Brahmāṇaspati, Brāhmaṇa is another name for the Bṛhas/Bṛhat tribe. While the Brāhmaṇas were first a warrior-tribe often used in the infantry by Indra, over time they acquired a priestly status given their association with and specialisation of fire-worship. In their warrior days they were the purohitas- the advanced guard. The title was retained even in their priestly function as the chief officiator of ritual. Given that the specialisation stayed within the tribe, passed exclusively from father to son, it may have been the genesis of the hereditary brahminism of later times.

These are interesting speculations. Aṅgira is never a real figure in Indian myth or history, and his son Bṛhaspati is the first true Āṅgirasa to emerge on the scene. This emergence is in the 6th manvantara, during the Samudra Manthana war between Devas and Asuras. That may well be the first instance of a Bṛhas/Bṛhat tribe aligning itself with Ādityas, and later it does so with Marutta Āvikṣita. The Bṛhaspatis also align themselves with Bharata, a name derived from the same root as Bṛhat. Bharata adopts a Bṛhaspati as his own son, and there is a Bṛhat in this line a few generations later. If these speculations are true, then this era represents the emergence of a true, organised tradition around the worship of fire. Fire itself is not a stranger to Indian rituals, having been introduced by Bhṛgu ṛṣis millennia ago. But the making of Agni as central to tradition, its elevation as the mouth of the gods, and the many applications of fire that go into metallurgy- these could be Bṛhaspati innovations.

But Bṛhaspatis or Āṅgirasas also serve to us the greatest example of discrepancy between Vedic and Paurāṇika testimonies. According to the Paurāṇika tradition we’ve visited above, Bṛhaspati was a contemporary to Marutta Āvikṣita and to him was born Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya. Either the son or grandson of the latter, Vidathin, was adopted by Bharata Dauṣyanti. But Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya is also primary composer of maṇḍala 6 of the Ṛgveda, which suggests that he’s contemporary to Divodāsa- a descendant of Bharata by several generations. This is a damning discrepancy, for both traditions cannot simultaneously be true unless they’re talking about different people. We find resolutions to this in the section titled ‘A Vedic Chronicle’ in Chapter 6.

For now we conclude the story of Marutta, and note the stirrings of a new era in Indian history. The 3rd millennium BC dawns, the era of SSC maturation and Bronze Age proper. The Haihayas have faced their first major defeat after centuries, and their progress seems momentarily stalled. A breathing space is given to tribes such as Aikṣvāku and Pūru, allowing for new figures to rise and old kingdoms to be revived. Historical Āṅgirasas arrive on the scene and trigger the rise of a new ritual order, soon to be crystallised into the Ṛgveda. The minor Tretā Yuga is upon us, and the story begins once again along the Gaṅgā. But before we get there, it’s time to address the question we delayed in the beginning of the chapter- what does all of this mean for the civilisational felt-experience?

Our civilisation remembers its past. Its gaze extends beyond epistemological event horizons and pushes at the frontiers of origin itself- when it speculates on consciousness and language (Brahmā and Vāc). It remembers the arboreal existence of our most primal ancestors, and the gradual journey they made out to the vast grasslands before learning to till grain and husband animal. It understands the utter enormity of time, of the infinite moving of the wheel- and thus it conceives of many past manvantaras. Given the chronological framework we use, by the time of Marutta Āvikṣita close to 4000 years have elapsed since the Samudra Manthana. If we find ourselves incredulous at the idea of cultural and traditional continuities lasting this long, we must remind ourselves of simple facts like the brick ratios of Mehrgarh- which were found four thousand years later again in Harappa and Kunal. Or of the cultural continuity between the famous Harappa Girl’s bangles and those found on Indian women to this day- again more than four thousand years later.

And this is in fact how civilisation is formed. Our individual consciousness is nothing if it does not possess an unbroken continuum of memory. If you do not possess the memory of your past self, there simply is no way for you to relate to it as ‘self.’ And this continuum of memory, when accumulating information over complex layers, experiences itself as consciousness. Thus does a continuum of history, when accumulating information over complex layers, experience itself as civilisation. In this case- the Bhāratīya civilisation. And lest we worry over the seeming retro-projection of the name ‘Bhārata,’ we have the story of Bharata Ṛṣabhaputra to humble us and trigger introspection.

Our experience from the early, nomadic eras of our past is that civilisational gains are tough, and sustainable ones even more so. The Samudra Manthana does represent a levelling-up in the civilisational trajectory, since it contains the wisdom of dharma through Śukra and Bṛhaspati, and the movement of Ādityas and Daityas towards a kind of meeting-of-traditios. But “*origin and annihilation occur continuously among living beings. Sages and other learned people are not deluded in this respect*.” And annihilations we did experience after the Samudra Manthana. We remember being hit by the 8.2-kiloyear event, though we blame it on Veṇa, and the genetic influx seen into India in the 7th millennium BC may well have been displaced populations reeling from the same catastrophe- felt as it was across modern Middle-East, Iraq and Iran. But perhaps in this past also lies evidence for the truth that tough times create strong men, and strong men create good times.

That strong man was Pṛthu Vainya, and the good times he created are remembered with searing clarity. We remember the significant and lasting levelling-up he ushered, so vast are the origins attributed to his era. And this memory is now being affirmed through archaeological evidence as well. The good times that strong men create, in turn, create weak men. And weak men create tough times. Those weak men were the Pracetas that migrated away, and the tough times were the widespread abandonment and desertification that followed. The cycle is never ending, and the wheel of civilisation moves on. One manvantara turns to another, and a new series of men create a new era of good times (readers are requested to forgive the use of masculine language here- made only for ease). Our experience is the advent of a whole new era, one that was the “present era” to the Vedic and Paurāṇika Indians, and originating through another flood myth in a critical representation of the fractal nature of our maṇḍala.

Archaeology tells us of how the SSC developed and organised in the 7th manvantara, a trajectory that finds detail in the migrations of Nahuṣa and Yayāti, in the ambitions of Śaśabindu and Māndhātṛ, and in the expansions of the Pūrus, Yādavas and Aiḳṣvākus among others. Archaeology so far has not affirmed to us our memory of the early days of Kāśi and Ayodhyā, and perhaps it never will given the nature of Gangetic geology. But in our experience is a deep past for life and civilisation along the Gāṅgā, one in which we often trace origins even as primal as Śiva’s for. Embedded in the tales of our cakravartins are not glorifications of bloodshed nor decimations of entire populations. Instead, each cakravartin is presented as a lesson on leadership and morality. A figure as ancient as Māndhātṛ, a conqueror beyond a doubt, becomes a lesson on the equality of men and a condemnation of discrimination by varṇa. Yayāti’s life becomes a warning on greed and sustainability, and Sivi’s an exemplar of personal sacrifice and surrender to dharma. These are inescapable clues on the organic will of ancient Indians, on the kinds of fractals the maṇḍala was being embedded with, each nesting onto previous fractals laid out by prior ancestors.

And a new learning awaited us in this era, given as we were confronted with a situation hitherto unfamiliar. This situation was the Haihayas, and the problem they represented is discussed in more detail in the concluding chapter. Here we note that our civilisation remembers facing this critical problem, and in our memory lies an unambiguous solution that was pursued for the problem. The memory is important, for civilisational problems are destined to recur given the cyclical nature of history. Let us move forward in our journey now.