---
title: brhadratha vira 2200
sno: 68
---

In 4000 BC, Yadu, the eldest son of Yayāti, was given the southern part of the kingdom. His descendants prospered in the consequent centuries, expanding along the Carmaṇavatī, Vetravatī, and Narmadā rivers while they branched into many sub-clans. In 3700 BC, Śaśabindu Caitraratha established a large kingdom that catalysed a wave of Yādava flowering. Tracing their geographical rise, we can conclude that these are the people that coalesce the regions of modern Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh in the 4th-3rd millennia BC. This is confirmed in the tale of Yādavas capturing the Nāga city of Kuśasthalī and renaming it Dvāraka, or their era of conflicts with Aikṣvākus over their later city Mathurā.

By 3000 BC, the expanding Yādavas cross the Narmadā and establish the kingdom of Vidarbha, eponymously named after a Yādava descendant of Jyāmagha, who was contemporary to Marutta Āvikṣita. The Haihaya line comes to a final end around this time, leaving the sons of Vidarbha room to expand their respective kingdoms. In the early 3rd millennium BC, Yādavas frequently appear as Rākṣasas and Asuras in Aikṣvāku tales as the two dynasties come in conflict for control over the Gangetic Plains, despite the fact that their royal lines have often married into each other. Some generations following the reign of Rāma Dāśarathi in 2600 BC, the Yādavas under Satvata Bhīma reclaim the middle Yamunā, and establish their capital at Mathurā.

As they expand under Bhīma’s sons Andhaka and Vṛṣṇi, they preside over the flowering of Dholavira, Lothal, Dvāraka, Ahar, Balathal and other southern SSC cities of the period. To the Ṛgvedic Bhāratas contemporaneous to them by 2500 BC, they are both friends and foes, the political situation changing one generation to next. As a whole, however, they appear allies who come from far shores, and crossing many rivers. Ṛgvedic hymns that request beatitude for Bhārata patrons also pray for safe passage of their Yadu allies. The most remote Ṛgvedic people are Turvaśas, who are often clubbed with Yadus. Ṛgvedic and Paurāṇik evidence both suggest that Turvaśa was a generic name for an assortment of southern Indian tribes. Among them were no doubt the Eastern Ānavas, who by this time had expanded south along India’s eastern coastline to the Mahānadī delta.

Bhīma’s primary line continues as the Sātvatas, and along with Vṛṣṇis, Cedis, Śūrasenas and other subclans they are poised to come into conflict with Kuru-Bhāratas towards the end of the 3rd millennium BC. It begins with Vasu, born in the Kuru line descended from Sudhanvana (Sudhanus). Following the Yamunā and Gaṅgā rivers downstream, he establishes a vast kingdom furthered by his five sons. There are neither Kanyākubjas nor Kāśīs to prevent this expansion, and the Pāñcāla lines of the Pūru-Bhāratas are subdued by the primary Kuru line descended from Jahnu. Vasu’s sons, collectively called the Vāsavas, go on to rule kingdoms of their own- Vatsa, Karūṣa, Magadha, Matsya and Cedi. Of these, the latter two they wrest from Yādavas, and the federation they establish from Uttar Pradesh to Rajasthan expands the OCP across this entire area. It helps that civilisation is now into the mature Bronze Age, with all the advantages to military and warfare that come with it.

Vasu’s eldest son, Bṛhadratha Vīra, is the final cakravartin of Paurāṇika tradition. He establishes the grand kingdom of Magadha, which in his era would have covered parts of erstwhile Kosala, Kāśī, and Aṅga. From him descends the Barhadratha dynasty of later Magadha, and during the Mahābhārata era they are ruled by Jarāsandha. The Epic remembers Bṛhadratha as a powerful warrior-king with a mighty army, and he took two daughters of Kāśī as his wives. Our placement of him at 2200 BC is tentative, and he could have lived anywhere between 2200-2000 BC. The Mahābhārata also lists Jarāsandha as his son, but in reality there were a few generations between them.

By 2000 BC we see the beginnings of Cemetery H culture on the Sarasvatī and Śatadru rivers, which is called so due to the emergence of cremation in human remains. This is in stark difference to previous SSC traditions, where bodies were buried in wooden coffins. Under the AIT/AMT model, Cemetery H represents the arrival of Indo-Aryans into India, displacing or overpowering the incumbent SSC inhabitants. But the archaeological picture is not of intrusion/replacement but cohabitation. It was more a transformation of (parts of) existing populations, represented in new burial practices and decorative motifs. Other trends in the early 2nd millennium BC are the abandonment of major SSC sites- Kalibangan, Mohenjodaro, Kot Diji, Dholavira, Ganweriwala and Rakhigarhi. Simultaneously, the number of sites on the upper Sarasvatī, in the region of Kurukṣetra, multiply fourfold.

From this period proceeds the standard AMT model. What we see is the decline of civilisation on the Sindhu and Sarasvatī, and the concentration of political power along the upper Yamunā and Sarasvatī by the Kuru-Bhāratas. Over the next thousand years, SSC declines completely and the nexus of civilisation shifts to the Gangetic Plains, giving AMT theoreticians the classic west-to-east migration they need. It should be noted that classical AIT was formulated prior to the discovery of Cemetery H or of Sarasvatī = Ghaggar-Hakra. Under that paradigm, it were invading Aryans who led to the demise of Mature Harappan, pushing its “dark-skinned inhabitants” into southern India. The discovery of a few burials in Mohenjodaro led us then to conclude that “Indra stood accused” for the death of SSC. The lack of horse remains in early Harappa were proof that Aryans entered into India later, but only when a preponderance of horse remains was not found in archaeology, even after the supposed invasion of ~1500 BC, did reputationists remind us that such was never to be expected in the first place!

The reality is that Aryans, or the Pūru and Kuru-Bhāratas, had never lost sight of their original homeland- the Gangetic Plains. Even as their own civilisation centered on the Sarasvatī and expanded beyond the Sindhu, they were in close contact with the Yamunā and Gaṅgā in multiple ways. The first was direct, royal contact- either by inter-marriage or by waging wars as allies. The second was cultural, material and archaeological, its gradual emergence in the record traced through the coalescence of SSC and OCP. The third, and arguably the most important, was the unification driven by Bhāratavarṣa’s ṛṣi order. The order is of immense diversity by Bṛhadratha’s era, many generations of Vāsiṣṭhas, Vaiśvāmitras, Āgastyas, Āṅgirasas, Bhārgavas, Ātreyas having perceived Vedic sūktas that have widespread veneration.

So when the Sarasvatī begins to dry up, when it stops meeting the ocean, when its mighty tributary, the Śatadru, breaks from it and meets the Sindhu instead, the migrating Kuru-Bhāratas turn towards the land of their ancestors. Strong, lasting fences have already been established in the north and north-west by the Pūru-Bhāratas that preceded them, and along the Sindhu still reside Ānava and other proto-Iranian people. Given the imposingly high wall of ice that the Mālyavān, Niṣadha and Himālaya ranges are, why wouldn’t the Kurus instead turn to the vast Gangetic Plains- bounteous with prosperity and land, following the many generations of Kanyākubja, Kāśī, Aikṣvāku and Vaiśālī rulers who brought civilisation here?

Thus is the capital of Paurāṇika genealogy brought back to where it all started from- Magadha. More than four thousand years have elapsed since a māgadha eulogised Pṛthu and acquired a kingdom as reward. Is that māgadha a projection back in time from the Barhadratha dynasty? The Purāṇas care not, for whether māgadhas began in 6500 BC and continued for millennia, or whether they emerged near 2000 BC and asserted a continuity from four millennia prior, the implication is the same. The Indians of 2000 BC knew their histories well. They knew how their civilisation had arisen, the major personalities who led this journey, and the many rises and fall of culture it took to get where they now were. The fractals knew the maṇḍala they belonged to, and they called it Bhārata.

Bṛhadratha’s era marks the beginning of a transition period between Vedic and post-Vedic Bhāratavarṣa, or between Harappan and post-Harappan India. The ṛṣis now concern themselves less with original dṛṣṭi, or Vedic perception, and more with organisation, compilation and transmission. We can recall tradition here which specifies that Ṛgvedic mantras were put together in the Tretā Yuga, and the Vedas arranged into form during the Dvāpara. Yajña and Dharma are also said to be instituted at this time, which is a clear allusion to the ritualistic religion that finds patronage under Pūru and Kuru Bhāratas. We’re also told that the question of violence towards animals becomes supremely pertinent during Vasu and Bṛhadratha’s reigns, including whether to use animals as sacrifice.

Near contemporaneous to Bṛhadratha is Hiraṇyanābha in the Aikṣvāku line. He and his disciple Kṛta created the eastern sāmans, or Vedic songs, and were decidedly known as kartās, not darṣṭās. By 2100 BC, two ministers at the court of Brahmadatta, a Kuru ruler of South Pāñcāla, compile the sūktas into a whole and establish a number of critical traditions. The minister Kaṇḍarīka (or Puṇḍarīka) was known as a dviveda, caṇḍoga, adhvaryu and a pravartaka of the Veda Śāstra. The minister Gālava (or Bābhravya) was an acclaimed bahvṛca, ācārya and polymath. To him is credited the establishment of śikṣā, the Vedic study of phonetics and phonology. He also instituted the karma-pātha, a method of Vedic recitation and memorisation. We can thus surmise that the vast body of Vedic knowledge, which hitherto was being transmitted by autodidact masters to their sons or disciples, had begun to gain a kind of formal system for education and transmission.

This is the world to which are born, sometime near 2000 BC, Kuru patriarchs such as Pratīpa and Śāntanu- who are the last rulers to be mentioned in the four Vedas. To observers of that time, there were more reasons than one to conclude that an era was at an end. The great peaking of civilisation, ushered in by rulers such as Bharata, Rāma and Sudās, was now to witness its inevitable decay. It was precipitated by a great migration of people, both to the west and to the east. Those who went west of the Sindhu followed their Ānava and Druhyu ancestors, towards the lands they would eventually consider home. Mid-2nd millennium bronze artefacts found as far as Armenia, with svāstika symbols on them, could have travelled during such migrations. Those who went east would rediscover the Gaṅgā, and seed the next great rise of Indian civilisation. Climatic and geological changes worsen the situation, and even a river as mighty as the Sarasvatī proves itself to be fickle. Two millennia of population advances, when mixed with this geological reality, means increased competition among the hundreds of clans and sub-clans that now descend from a handful of distant common ancestors. The Great War of Bhāratavarṣa is nigh.