---
title: civilisation and its origins
sno: 12
---

We tend to define civilisation by its material artefacts. Modern civilisation is reflected to us in the internet, mobile phones, cars, advanced medical equipment and treatment, our ability to land on the moon and to send rovers to Mars. But for ancient cultures, the two primary material artefacts of civilisation are agriculture and the wheel. It’s been argued that organised agriculture brings a food surplus, which needs storage facilities and armies to protect them. This triggers political organisation, for armies are commanded by rulers and paid for their services through public taxation. The simple act of sowing seed inevitably sows civilisation itself.

Organisation is first of a nature organic. Seeds and cultivation techniques intermingle to create a standardised farming culture. The resulting population booms increase the complexity and spread of settlements. Traders form travel networks, establishing a local knowledge of forests, hills, rivers and how to navigate it all. Food-surplus related leisure allows artisans more time and their techniques advance, as do customer expectations. Better quality of craftsmanship travels further, sometimes reaching civilisations a world away. Strong tribal leaders emerge who yoke subclans and villages together. Social and cultural contracts are formed among communities, the distance between them grows figuratively shorter, and thus do isolated cultures coalesce into a civilisation. In the SSC this begins first along the Sarasvatī, at places such as Rakhigarhi and Bhirrana. Later, by the 3rd millennium BC, it spreads to the Sindhu and establishes cities such as Harappa, Mohenjodaro and Lothal. The early underground pits are replaced by surface dwellings, erstwhile settlements become fortified towns, large farms and metallurgy centers rise as civilisational lighthouses.

Somewhere during this journey emerge centers of capital. Knowledge and ritual, as it becomes specialised, is concentrated in the hands of a select few. War and rule become the property of another group, which generation after generation dedicates itself to weaponry, administration, protection and expansion. All of it flows through an economy managed by merchants, accountants and traders, whose diligent book-keeping is often the first written record of civilisation. And the remaining mass of humanity is involved in physical labour, the necessary capital of any economy through farming, artisanship, construction and other back-breaking work. This has been noticed across societies, and in India the fourfold organisation was called the varṇa system, the four groups being Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras. A lot has to happen before this social order becomes the rigid, hereditary and inhuman manifestation of casteism that we see in India today. But in early civilisation it isn’t an imposed hegemony, it’s an emergent property of self-organisation. When one tribe dedicated itself to a hereditary specialisation of fire-worship, another to undertaking long-distance journeys to exchange materials with alien people, and yet another preferred to retain its arboreal living- no top-down order forced these trajectories, but a difference among them was engendered nonetheless.

At many SSC cities the archaeologist BB Lal speculated on the existence of social stratification. He noticed the separation between an upper town, or Citadel, and the lower town, as well as the workers’ barracks in Harappa and Mohenjodaro. That the early SSC possessed Vaiśya and Śūdra capital is scarcely in doubt. It was a voracious exporter, sending things like lapis lazuli and cattle to the far west. A common system of weights and measures was spread across it by 2500 BC, indicating that account-keepers were tallying their books with each other. The elaborate grids of SSC cities, the fortified walls, the advanced drainage systems, agriculture and craftsmanship all attest to a well-functioning labour class. BB Lal is not confident in speculating the upper town to be some sort of priestly quarters, but of the lower town’s commercial nature and the worker barracks’ lower standard of living he is certain.

On Brāhmins and Kṣatriyas, protagonists of Vedic and Paurāṇika literature, the SSC is less revealing. Experts are not in agreement on whether the SSC had a ruling class, some favouring the view that it was governed by a group of guilds or śreṇis. But all human endeavour, however egalitarian, needs at least a leader among equals. Early Ṛgvedic society might have been organised along a similar egalitarian principle. Vedic rājās were leaders among equals more and divinely-ordained monarchs less. There were sabhās and samitīs, or organisations of common-folk, which influenced all decisions and had to be consulted by the rājā. This is close to ideas of benign rule in the SSC. Human civilisation is rooted in tribal structures, which along the trajectory of labour specialisation and agriculture evolve into groups and social orders of higher complexity. The pattern is evidenced in Indian history.

On SSC’s religion much has been made on whether it was Vedic, pre-Vedic, proto-Vedic or something else altogether. An understanding of what dharma really is reveals that the SSC religion was all of the above, for Vedic represents only one strand in dharma. Figurines in various poses of yoga, seals depicting a deity-like figure that’s equated by some to be proto-Rudra, depictions of the svāstika and the discovery of Vedic fire altars are evidence that we cannot find mutual exclusivity between SSC and Vedic religions. Srini Kalyanaraman suggests that SSC was based around metallurgy, and that the Ṛgvedic soma is an analogy for tin. He imagines Vedic rituals as ancient processes that mixed mysticism and metallurgy to create a sacred order around the extraction of tin from ore. This makes the early ṛṣi a kind of magician-priest, his engagement with fire bringing civilisation to the Sarasvatī. It has resonance with the Ṛgvedic myth of Bhṛgu bringing Agni and Soma to the early Āryas. This is admittedly fanciful speculation, yet there would have been a person or group of people who first struck upon the vital intuitions that moved civilisation forward. Bhṛgu is not a literal person but an archetype of such early innovators.

The 3rd millennium BC is the story of SSC proper, of its mature and advanced state with large urban centers, long distance trade, writing, town planning, and metallurgy. The Indus script is silent to us, but Vedic and Paurāṇika literature give us a vivid picture of at least a section of populace in those times. The early stories in tradition paint a clear picture of Neolithic existence, and initial expansions take those Indians to the Sarasvatī right around the time when urban cultures emerge. By the time ambitious monarchs truly enter the picture, Bronze Age technologies pave way for civilisation proper. There is no longer any reason to consider the SSC and Vedic civilisations as mutually exclusive cultures. In fact, the only archaeologically documented west-to-east migration in India happens after the SSC’s demise in the 2nd millennium BC. Post this we see a shift in the civilisational capital to the Gangetic Plains. Around this time Vedic tradition’s focus shifts here too. The Sarasvatī loses its literal importance, remembered hence as a deity and myth. Here tradition and archaeology move in sync. We’ve never known whether the SSC was an empire- a kingdom under one yoke. Maybe it was, and maybe it was a few kingdoms combined. Maybe it was all of these but at different points in time. In ancient Indian traditions we can find some answers.

Key to this is understanding that while the broad Harappan period of the SSC lasts around 2,000 years, from 3000 to 1000 BC, there were cultures for at least five thousand years preceding that. The Harappan period itself is divided into Early, Mature and Late periods. Civilisation did not exist as a static entity during this vast period. Cities rose and fell, settlements shifted and entire populations migrated from one part of India to another. While the SSC coalesces into a mature Harappan archaeology by 2500 BC, prior to that there are cultural differences in regions. The Sindh/Punjab area appears different to the Sarasvatī-Dṛṣadvatī area, and the eastern parts of Uttar Pradesh have their own trajectory. These are captured in pre-Harappan cultures such as Kot Diji Culture, Ravi Phase, Hakra Ware Culture, Sothi-Siswal Culture and others. The picture that emerges is of different political centers arising in the pre and early Harappan phases, and we can map this to what Indian tradition tells us about the development of different tribes and dynasties. For major cities such as Bhirrana, Kalibangan, Harappa, Mohenjodaro, Dholavira and more, we can make intelligent guesses on who their rulers were and the conditions that led to their demise.

Taken as a whole the SSC did not exist in isolation. In Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Afghanistan has been found the Oxus Civilisation, or Bactria Margiana Archaeological complex (BMAC). Dated between 2400-1900 BC for its mature phase, BMAC was a contemporary to mature SSC and the two had extensive trade and cultural contacts. In the mainstream AIT scenario, Indo-Iranians cohabited a space for some time before splitting into Indian and Iranian groups. Plotting their journey from the Steppe, BMAC appears a likely candidate for this shared space. But it’s equally plausible within the OIT scenario, where Druhyus, Ānavas and other proto-Iranian tribes shared space with Pūru elements around BMAC before dispersing westward (derided as Westward Ho! by Witzel, as if the posited spread of Steppe Pastoralists in all directions is less incredulous a suggestion- Everywhere Ho!). As mentioned earlier, BMAC ancestry has not been found in Indian genetics. Further, later research has shown BMAC itself to be composed primarily of Iranian ancestry. While genetics is not equal to language, we can be sure that humans largely migrated from the Indian geographical sphere to the BMAC and not the other way around. We will discuss BMAC in greater detail in specific stories. Dynastic Egypt and civilisational Sumer also appear on the historical horizon by the mid-4th millennium BC, though tradition is either weak or highly ambiguous on references to them.

And yet all of this is the descriptive account of civilisation, a chronicle that struggles to transcend events, chronologies and personalities. But civilisation is the felt-experience of being alive and aware, and the history of civilisation is akin to the memory of the individual. To quote Yasuda Yoshinory- “*Civilisation begins to appear when a workable system for living, that is a proper relationship between man and nature, is established in accord with the features of a given region*.” To put this as a felt-experience, what is meant is that civilisation emerges when humans begin to question their place, impact and consequence within the larger environment. A true history of civilisation is one that transcends the descriptive, and is able to articulate the felt-experience.

This is the kind of history that is available to us in Indian literature, and inevitably it thus speaks with dharma at its core. For dharma is the Indian endeavour to live in organic harmony with ṛta- the natural order. *Yathā piṇḍe tathā brahmāṇde*- as in the microcosm, so in the macrocosm- is the Indian worldview. And the story of Indian civilisation is that of how this worldview emerged and manifested in society. It’s the failure to understand this that has led us to accuse ancient Indians of having no historical sense. In fact they had the truest historical sense, for they knew the uselessness of history that gives no lessons, or that has nothing in it for us to draw from and better ourselves. All the Western civilisation’s diligent history on when, which explorer landed on what part of the New World appears futile, when we see that we’ve learnt nothing from the tortures wrought and decimation conducted on other civilisations. Armed with what we know from linguistics, archaeology, genetics and other evidence, the Indian felt-experience can now be mapped along a plausible chronology.