---
title: daksha and reset of time
sno: 41
---

Many generations after Pṛthu are born the Pracetas, sons of Barhiṣa in Pṛthu’s line. All dynasties suffer from the decay of time, and Pṛthu’s is no different. Disinterested in rule, the Pracetas migrate away in search of meditative knowledge. This is the departure of Pṛthu’s line from India, and it’s followed by a general decay remembered in the Purāṇas as Prithvī being left unguarded. Trees overgrow human settlements, vines and creepers take over the habitations and farmlands disappear in vast cataclysms of fire. An appeal is made to the Pracetas to return, and in this is revealed the oft-used trick of Paurāṇika composers.

Not all history was available to them. They did not always know how one dynasty passed to another, how civilisation arose again after a decay. So they used the concept of progenitors, or Prajāpatis who incarnated afresh in each era to seed population. Manu is the best example of this, and indeed he is the first among all Prajāpatis. Kaśyapa is another, as is Dakṣa who gave his daughters away. To the Pracetas then is reborn Dakṣa the Prajapati, and once again he gives his daughters to the primary ṛṣis- Marīcī, Atri and others. But a significant period elapses before this. Dakṣa first begets a group of sons known as Haryāśvas, who are lured away from reproduction and towards meditation by Nārada according to Paurāṇika accounts. The same fate befalls Dakṣa’s second creation, a group of sons called Śabalāśvas. Only then are the ṛṣis born anew, and thus are Ādityas found in genealogy again. In multiple Purāṇas the listener interrupts the narrator here and demands an explanation. How is Dakṣa born again? How is another Kaśyapa found in the current manvantara? To this the Purāṇas patronisingly reply- “*Origin and annihilation occur continuously among living beings. Sages and other learned people are not deluded in this respect*.”

What they mean is that, instead of miring themselves in the unique technicalities behind each era, they paint a broad pattern that applies to any. In around 4500 BC a descendant of the Pracetas establishes marital relations with an Āditya tribe, and through this union is born Vivasvān or Sūrya. Purandara reigns as the current Indra, and Soma or Candra falls in love with Bṛhaspati’s wife Tārā, fathering the infant Budha. Another great Deva-Asura war breaks out over this act of adultery, where the furious Bṛhaspati is supported by Ādityas and the truant Candra by Śukra and Daityas. To Vivasvān the Sūrya is born Vaivasvat Manu, and the latter’s daughter Ilā will marry Budha. The current era of ancient Indians, the 7th manvantara, has begun. After a long journey from the nomadic to proto-rural living, through generations of bloody warfare and spurts of cultural consolidation, from eras of amoral lifestyle and warfare, emerges a new social order possibly speaking PIE, though both in its ancestry and neighbourhood still reside Austroasiatic, Tibeto-Burman and Dravidian speakers. Not for another 2,500 years will India’s genetic tapestry be visited by a foreign influx.