---
title: uttanapada and dhruva
sno: 39
---

The only link between Svāyambhuva Manu’s patrilineal and matrilineal descendants emerges in Uttānapāda, his younger son. Uttānapāda’s daughter Kayādhū marries Hiraṇyakaśipu and is mother to Prahlāda, implying that even Mānavas and Daityas have a deep antiquity of admixture. But because Uttānapāda and his descendants paint a picture of the early Neolithic, we must conclude that the line did not exist in the Mesolithic era of Daityas and Ādityas. Imagining Indian civilisation radiate out from its heart, between Narmadā to the Gaṅgā, since the 10th millennium BC, by Uttānapāda’s time in the 8th-7th millennia BC the ancient Indians have reached up to the Sindhu, having already encountered the Sarasvatī in Prahlāda’s time. Progress in technology and culture, as evidenced in the Samudra Manthana myth, has enabled humans to yoke the earth. Basic farming and animal husbandry have commenced, and a coming population explosion will seed early towns like Mehrgarh and Bhirrana.

Uttānapāda is already a king when he appears in literature, and through his wives Suruci and Sunīti he fathers the sons Uttama and Dhruva. The king favours his first wife and son, and young Dhruva is often chastised for having been born to the wrong mother. He resolves to attain a reputation higher than that of his father, and to this end begins a period of penance considered exemplary by Hindu literature. It places Dhruva near the Yamunā river, where Mahāviṣṇu finally appears to him and assures him a place in the heavens. Thus does Dhruva become the Pole Star, a critical celestial body of later Indian astronomy. Having received the boon Dhruva returns to his people, now felicitated as the greatest devotee of Mahāviṣṇu ever. The retiring Uttānapāda leaves the kingdom to him and the son presides over a peaceful, prosperous populace.

We’re talking about Neolithic Indians, about people who likely lived in sparse settlements of a few wattle-and-daub huts or underground pit-dwellings, yet to discover ore and metallurgy. But we see that issues of inheritance and ownership have emerged by now. Among the Daityas and Ādityas paternity was rarely an issue, and though elder progeny had right of rule the younger were never any less legitimate. Tribes even adopted children from other tribes, as Andhaka the son of Rudra was adopted by Hiraṇyākṣa. But among Uttānapāda’s descendants these concerns are vivid. This is in line with what we should expect among a nomadic, tribal population that begins to settle down. Hitherto there’s no ownership and children are brought up commonly by the tribe. Now there’s private property, and a father cares whether the progeny is his. We may judge this ‘genesis of patriarchy’ for what it is, but as Harari articulates in Sapiens it’s an evolution widespread in humanity.

During a hunt Dhruva’s elder brother is killed by Yakṣas and this sparks a war, the first known war between Mānavas and another tribe. All wars prior to this have between Daityas and Ādityas, with other tribes taking one side or the other. But from the Gangetic Plains a tribe of Indians begins to spread, and as it expands to the forests of the lower Himālaya it runs into Yakṣas- who have lived here for thousands of years. Dhruva defeats the Yakṣas and brings them under this submission, and we may wonder how a people just learning warfare are able to overcome a tribe whose ancestors battled alongside heavyweights such as Tārakāsura and Śatakratu Indra. Clearly there’s a technological chasm here which the Mānavas are on the right side of. Is this the early Chalcolithic?

Dhruva has many sons, but the kingdom descends to his eldest son Vatsara. Six generations after Dhruva is born Cakṣu, in whose time the great ocean churning myth is dated. The defeat of Bali here marks a reset of time. Amṛtam passes to the Ādityas while Daitya dynasties fade into myth. We cannot say how the mythological turns to the historical, or how focus shifts from Devas and Asuras to a nascent Mānava dynasty. But that it does, and that the period of decay during this transitional time is documented by Dhruva’s descendants, is well revealed by tradition.

To Cakṣu is born Ulmuka, whose grandson is the king Veṇa. We are brought by now to the second half of the 7th millennium BC, during which organised agriculture has commenced at both Mehrgarh and Bhirrana. The descendant of a dynasty in power for more than a century, Veṇa is as complacent and arrogant as dynasts have been throughout history. He bans the study of Vedas (a retroactive reference), bans rituals of all kinds, and prohibits the usage of soma- which he denies even Ādityas the access to. Instead he commands people to pray to him, declaring himself to be the only true source of power. His reign is marked by widespread drought and famine. The earth dries up, the trees disappear, and even the waters are not to be found. Arguably this is a memory of the 8.2 Kiloyear event of 6200 BC. But narrative blames poor Veṇa, whose people rebel under the ṛṣis and dethrone him. In his place is installed his son, Pṛthu Vainya, and here begins Indian political proto-history.