---
title: divodasa bharata 2700
sno: 64
---

In the centuries following Suhotra, we are brought simultaneously to the maturation both of Ṛgvedic Aryans and the archaeological Harappans. It’s uncanny how the Ṛgveda and the SSC appear as two dimensions of the same grand civilisation, regardless of what angle one approaches from. It was realised by Colin Renfrew when he looked at the matter holistically, asserted from archaeology by BB Lal in The Rigvedic People, is mapped between linguistics and recent archaeology by Giacomo Beneditti, Alexander Semenenov and Igor Tonoyan-Belyayev, and affirmed with multiple lines of evidence by Talageri. In fact the only line of resistance comes from linguists, who among themselves cannot agree whether SSC spoke Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, Austroasiatic, (para) Munda or some mixture of these.

To the Purāṇas, Suhotra is followed by Hastina and then Bṛhat. The Paurāṇika Bhāratas by this stage control the upper reaches of Sarasvatī, Dṛṣadvatī and Yamunā. Other towns to arise are Nāgadhanvana (which might be Kalibangan) and Sapta Sarasvatī (which might be Bhirrana). South of the Bhāratas, Yādava clans dominate the lower Yamunā and its tributaries Carmaṇavatī and Vetravatī. Over the past centuries they’ve taken over the space vacated by Haihayas, coming to control settlements such as Mathurā, Śaktivaṭī, Avanti and Dvārakā. They’re split into several sub-clans- Vṛṣṇis, Cedis, Vidarbhas, Satvatas and more- but they possess a federal unity that prevents an overabundance of internecine conflict.

To Bṛhat are born three sons- Ajamīḍha, Dvimīḍha and Purumīḍha. Of the latter two we hear little again, and from Ajamīḍha descend the three primary Bhārata lines. The first line continues from Hastināpura with Ajamīḍha’s eldest son, Ṛkṣa. The second line descends from Nīla and is called the North Pāñcālas. Their capital is at Ahikṣetra near modern Bareilly, and in this line descend Ṛgvedic Bhāratas such as Divodāsa and Sudās. The third line under Bṛhadvasu migrates further south on the Gaṅgā, and establishes South Pāñcāla with the capital at Kāmpilya (modern Kampil). Of these lines, the North Pāñcālas dominate the period 2700-2300 BC, continually expanding westwards as evidenced in the Ṛgveda, but they find scarce mention in Paurāṇika literature beyond a name in genealogy such: Nīla > Suśanti > Purujānu > Bhṛmyaśva > Mudgala > Vadhryaśva > Divodāsa > Mitrayu > Sṛñjaya > Cyavana (Pijavana) > Sudās > Sahadeva > Somaka. Beyond this there’s a break in continuity, and only in the Mahābhārata era do we find names such as Drupada, Dṛṣṭadyumna and Kṛpācārya hail from the North Pāñcāla line.

The South Pāñcālas expand along the lower Gaṅgā, settling new towns like Krivi and Kāmpilya while coming into contact with Yādavas, Kāśīs and Aikṣvākus. Their ancient ancestors, the Pūrus, once ruled the town of Pratiṣṭhāna, now called Prayāga and likely controlled by kings of Kāśī. It’s unknown whether the Pāñcālas recognise this legacy, but they will soon vie for control over the Gangetic Plains. By the Mahābhārata era they will come under control of Drupada of North Pāñcāla, who loses the territory to Droṇācārya, a Bhāradvāja. The line of Ṛkṣa at Hastināpura fades into obscurity during the early period, likely under westward pressure from their North Pāñcāla cousins, who overrun them to reach modern Punjab.

The Purāṇas remember this as a tale of Saṁvaraṇa, the son of Ṛkṣa, being lost in the forest for a thousand years before a son named Kuru is born to him. This forest is the Kuru Jāṅgala that once covered Delhi and large parts of Haryana and western UP. Saṁvaraṇa is more accurately placed contemporary to Sudās in ~2500 BC, likely part of the Pūrus that Sudās battles in the Ṛgveda. Sometime after the period of Somaka, Sudās’ descendant, Kuru the descendant of Saṁvaraṇa comes to power and clears a settlement for himself named Kurukṣetra. This marks the rise of the Kuru-Bhāratas, who will settle the score with their North Pāñcāla cousins. The period following 2300 BC sees the expansion of Kuru clans across and beyond the territories occupied by the Pāñcālas, their only legitimate political rivals being the Yādavas. Together, they will form the protagonists of the Mahābhārata.

The above covers Paurāṇika testimony about the Bhāratas. Among the Ṛgvedic Bhāratas, we find Devavāta listed as an ancestor to Sudās, Sṛñjaya and Devaśravas. Sṛñjaya in turn is ancestor to Divodāsa, whose father is given as Vadhryaśva and son as Sudās. But the latter is also called Paijvana, meaning he was a son or descendant of Pijavana. Sudās’ descendants are Sahadeva and Somaka. These men, primarily Divodāsa and Sudās, are protagonists of the Ṛgveda, insofar as we’re looking for political protagonists. We also find the names Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna and Kavi Cāyamāna, who from their patronymic appear related to Cyavana Bhārgava (or alternately descend from Pijavana/Cyavana). To Talageri they represent Ānavas who are aligned with Bhāratas first, but in conflict with them by the time of Sudās.

Divodāsa is prominent in maṇḍala 6, composed primarily by Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya, but two Divodāsas are alluded to in the hymns. RV 6-16 demonstrates the beginnings of Vedic ritualism under Bharadvāja when it invites Agni to the settlements of Divodāsa. It proclaims the latter to be a soma-presser, and tells us that Agni helped Vṛṣān Pāthya in besting Dasyus. Pāthyas appear in tradition as Vedic priests, so this lines up with Talageri’s conclusion that Dasyus were rivals to Vedic ṛṣis, and thus the most animosity was reserved for them. In RV 6-26 we find a striking example of why we should be cautious with English translations of the Ṛgveda, especially those made by scholars and linguists far removed from traditional readings. The word Dāsa in the 5th verse here is translated by JB as ‘barbarian,’ a remarkable projection if ever there was one. For all the academic derision of Griffith’s translation, he at least leaves words like Dāsa as they are, without bringing in his own paradigm (though he too translates Dānu as demon on occasion).

As a whole the hymn extols Indra for his many victories, and appeals for similar beatitude. Verse 3 tells us he helped Uśanā Kāvya, which is strange given that according to the Purāṇas Uśanas was a Daitya preceptor. The verse also tells us Indra aided Kutsa against Śuṣṇa, and the Atithigva of its second line appears to be Divodāsa Bhārata, for whom Bharadvāja composes these hymns. Verse 4 lists Daśadyu, Vetasu and Tuji as Indra’s beneficiaries, while verse 5 refers to Divodāsa’s battle against the Dāsa Śambara. This is good revelation for Ṛgvedic chronology. Though Bharadvāja composes these hymns for his contemporary Divodāsa Atithigva, in verse 5 he alludes to the historical Divodāsa’s battles with a Śaṃbara. This is clear from the verses before and after, which refer to past battles where Indra came to people’s aid.

Verse 8 shows an example where we ought to translate a word adjectivally, and not as a proper noun. Prātardani here is left as is by Griffith and translated as ‘son of Pratardana’ by JB, which is the reading Talageri favours. But prātardani in this case could also be translated adjectivally as that which ‘thrusts forth with force,’ which is in line with the rest of the verse which lists the qualities of Indra- glorious in domination, smasher of obstacles and gainer of riches. In the rest of the hymn, Indra’s friends are Dabhīti and Piṭhīnas against Cumuri and Raji respectively. Anyone can read these hymns, and it’s indeed a surprise that experts have long found Aryan vs. Dravidian colours in the Ṛgveda. A reading of names in RV 6-26 alone shows that both among Indra’s friends and foes are names non-Indo-Aryan, there’s never an ethnic divide along clean lines. Some of Indra’s battles here are also referenced in other hymns, which throw up more examples of blurred lines between what could be determined Indo-Aryan and what Dravidian/Austroasiatic/Sino-Tibetan.

RV 6-31 is by composed by Suhotra Bharadvāja, who the anukramaṇīs are careful not to ascribe the patronymic Bhāradvāja to. Here too the allusions to Indra’s battles appear in the past tense, and the reference to Divodāsa II of Kāśī is made in verse 4 to claim special patronage for the Bhārata of the same name, who Bharadvāja sings for. The Ṛgveda relishes using similar sounds to imply multiple meanings, and as the first composers the Bharadvājas would have been delighted to find an earlier ruler with the same name as their patron, allowing for yet another layer of word-play. The verse works at the contemporary level just the same, for Divodāsa Bhārata too battled Dāsas and Dasyus. We are met here with a counter to Talageri’s distinction of Dasyus as Dāsa priests. RV 6-26 refers to Śaṁbara as a Dāsa, while in RV 6-31 he’s a Dasyu. Either Śaṁbara was the Dāsa equivalent of a priest-king, meriting the titles of both Dāsa and Dasyu, or we should in these hymns take him to be a mythic figure, or Talageri’s distinction is not quite as neat.

A similar pattern is found in RV 6-43, but by hymn 47 the tone changes. RV 6-47 is composed by Garga Bhāradvāja, and here again the patronymic is a helpful indicator. It tells us that Garga is at least a generation after Bharadvāja, and explains why he can speak of Divodāsa Bhārata’s deeds while Bharadvāja worked more with the tales of Divodāsa II of Kāśī. By Garga’s time, Divodāsa Bhārata (as Atithigva) has battled the Dāsas Varcin and Śaṁbara and extracted significant war bounty. Consisting of horses, caskets (presumably of treasure), gold, cows and chariots, some of this bounty is distributed among the Bhāradvājas and other ṛṣis. In Divodāsa’s early period, prior to his conquests, his preceptor was Bharadvāja, who kick-started Ṛgvedic composition by kindling the primal Ādityas on behalf of his patron. In listings of Indra’s past favours, the final entry was always of an earlier Divodāsa- a template for the later Divodāsa in more ways than one. This fuels Divodāsa Bhāratas early campaigns, building on the successes of ancestors such as Devavāta and Suhotra.

These campaigns likely take him to the Sindhu’s eastern tributaries, pitting him against Dāsas like Varcin and Śaṁbara. We would have no hesitation in equating these Dāsas with Ānavas, if not for the inconvenience of Daśaratha Aikṣvāku being contemporary to Divodāsa and also battling Śaṁbara- but with Kekaya as his ally. Kekaya, as we’ll recall, was established by Sivi Auśinara’s Ānava descendants. How can Ānavas ally with Daśaratha against Śaṁbara, and at the same time fight against Divodāsa as Śaṁbara? There’s the added element that the Ṛgveda is fully aware of the Ānavas as one of the pañcajana tribes, so why would it not call Dāsas that if it were the case? One explanation is that Ānavas in Divodāsa’s era are still a friendly tribe, their actions not warranting the labels of Dāsa or Dasyu.

Ṛgvedic evidence alone is not conclusive in determining Divodāsa’s direct descendant, though it’s unlikely to have been Sudās. One descendant is Parucchepa Daivodāsi, composer of verses 127 to 139 of maṇḍala 1. Parucchepa and his descendants become brāhmins and join the Bhārgava school, a sign perhaps that the Bhārgavas are quick to join the emergent Vedism of Āṅgirasas. But that Parucchepa’s hymns feature not in maṇḍala 6 but the later maṇḍala 1, tells us that Ṛgvedic composition was initially the exclusive forte of Bhāradvāja Āṅgirasas. Parucchepa’s compositions could be added to the tape-recording only later, when their dialect was modified for Ṛgvedic expression. Another explanation is that, with their allegiance to the Bhārgavas, they simply did not have place in early Ṛgvedic ritualism which was dominated by Bārhaspatya purohitas. The place was created later, and so the prayers were incorporated later. Parucchepa refers to his ancestor at RV 1-130-7, where he praises Indra for having helped Divodāsa against Śaṁbara. His hymns paint a syncretic picture, dedicated to a variety of deities and referring to ancient figures such as Ayu, Vaivasvat, Bhṛgu and Atri. Divodāsa also features in maṇḍala 1 in hymns by the first generation Āṅgirasas beginning with Dīrghatamāsa, but this is Divodāsa II of Kāśī. And the few references to Divodāsa by Vāmadeva in maṇḍala 4 serve more an adjectival and phonetic purpose, the historical in them existent in other hymns anyway.

RV 6-27 by Bharadvāja names a curious figure- Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna. It seems to suggest a battle between Abhyāvartin and Varaśikha, whose army of Vṛcīvatas Indra helps destroy. Verse 6 places the battle at the rivers Hariyūpīyā and Yavyāvatī (Irāvatī and Dṛṣadvatī), while verse 7 has Indra handing Turvaśa and the Vṛcīvatas over to Sṛñjaya, son of Devavāta. Turvaśa’s inclusion here is confusing, for the name is otherwise placed in southern India. The verse also makes us wonder whether Abhyāvartin and Sṛñjaya are the same person, but in verse 8 Abhyāvartin is called a Pārthava, which translates as ‘descendant of Pṛthu.’ Who is Abhyāvartin, and what is his connection to Ṛgvedic Bhāratas?

Neither Griffith nor JB find in *paśuṣ kavir aśayac cāyamānaḥ* of RV 7-18-8 any evidence of Kavi Cāyamāna, which is strange. More than enough contextual evidence exists to suggest that Kavi Cāyamāna of the Pārthavas fought in the Battle of Ten Kings against Sudās. Abhyāvartin appears allied to Sṛñjaya while his descendant Kavi is in opposition to Sudās, indicating that Pārthavas have become Bhārata enemies in the intervening period. Talageri suggests that Pārthavas are a line of Kekaya Ānavas, and this helps us explain why Kekaya is aligned to Daśaratha during Divodāsa’s era. It further explains why Daśaratha’s wife Kaikeyī would name her son Bharata- a favourable name to the Ānavas of her time. This Bharata and his sons campaign extensively in Ānava lands, pushing the boundaries of empire towards modern Afghanistan.

The transition from friendly Ānavas to enemy Pārthavas represents the definitive PIE dispersal era, however clumsy it may appear under pedantic critique. Talageri sees the early maṇḍalas dating to 3000 BC or earlier, and the later maṇḍalas to be not much later than 2500 BC. Our chronology has actual Ṛgvedic composition begin in 2700 BC and last till around 2300 BC, though the interpretation in ‘A Vedic Chronicle’ at the beginning of this chapter has the Vedic period begin around 3100 BC with Viśvāmitra Gāthina and Jamadagni Bhārgava. Tonoyaṇ-Belyayev places the period of PIE dispersal between 3300-2600 BC, so there is broad agreement in all models. Talageri’s work is not shorn of linguistic rigour by any means, but it’s predicated fundamentally on an analysis of the Ṛgveda. Tonoyan-Belyayev is no stranger to Ṛgvedic content, but he arrives at his conclusions primarily with a linguistic base. The disagreement between their models might represent an uncertainty we’ll always have to live with, but it casts no significant ambiguity on Indian and PIE history. The evidence is unmistakable that the era of Sudās Paijavana is one of PIE dispersals from the homeland, and the uncertainty of a few centuries is a comfortable problem to work with. The more remarkable fact is that Talageri’s Ṛgvedic analysis, Tonoyan-Belyayev’s linguistic model, and our Paurāṇika template all arrive at similar dates and events.

This also casts new questions for models that date the Rāmāyaṇa to ~12000 BC, for example. Doing so must reconcile synchronisms between Divodāsa and Daśaratha, or take literally the assertion that “thousands of years” elapsed between Saṁvaraṇa and Kuru. It forces us to posit that PIE dispersal happened before the Holocene, an argument that must deny all of the current theories on language. We would also have to argue, with no reason other than to support this date, that the Purāṇas have lost record of untold generations between Rāma and Bṛhadbala, or between Parīkṣit and Mahāpadma Nanda. We’d even have to ask ourselves why Rāma would have needed to build his bridge, given that Sri Lanka was joined to the tip of southern India in 12000 BC. These are only a few examples of cascading inconsistencies that emerge from taking transmitted astronomical timestamps as the guiding light. In reality, we can accept linguistic, archaeological and genealogical evidence to form a historically plausible model, without denying deep roots and continuity to culture in the Indian subcontinent.