---
title: early rshis, or magician shamans
sno: 23
---

Ancient humans were not as technologically advanced as us, but this didn’t make their personal and civilisational concerns any less complicated. They needed to know how to predict the seasons, plough the land and prepare it for sowing, cultivate grain and crops of all kinds, harvest, store and prepare them for consumption, extract metal from ore, build tools, weapons and vehicles, breed animals and domesticate them for labour, navigate the rivers and hills, forests and deserts- this and much more while they dealt with personal issues of love, hate, envy, desire, jealousy and all other sentiments familiar to us. They also had to learn how to co-operate and organise at large scales, and how to protect their communities from the ambitions or ravages of others. The only way for them to transmit knowledge was orally from parent to child, or from tribal elders to the young ones. Some knew how to extract metal, others knew how to prepare barley from raw grain, yet others knew how to read the night skies and predict seasons. A rare few were polymaths who possessed multiple streams of knowledge. These people did not have writing, they could not write instruction manuals or encyclopaedias. They had to find a way to encode knowledge in sound and myth such that it could transmit through the generations, while preserving its meaning and character.

Woven from the roots of daily language, the polymaths among them created incantations that collated the knowledge of their culture, meticulous hymns that carried multiple layers of meaning where history, astronomy, mythology and esoteric knowledge could coexist. Most etymologies of the word ṛṣi derive it from the root ṛṣ meaning ‘to flow’ or dṛṣ meaning ‘to see.’ This translates ṛṣis to seers, those who perceived eternal wisdom and encoded it in prayers. An alternate explanation comes from the Agni Purāṇa, which states that ṛṣi comes from the root ra which means sound itself. A ṛṣi then is a master of sound, of encoding meaning in the syllables and words understood by common people. The ancient polymaths were these ṛṣis, people who maintained sacred knowledge and ensured its transmission. They were the ones to consult if the rains didn’t come, if the forces of fertility were to be appeased, if the processes of metallurgy were to be detailed, if ancient gods were to be invoked for major festivals and sacrifices, or even if personal dilemmas needed resolution. Their prayers contained magic- the esoteric knowledge not available to regular people. No wonder their original archetypes are all called sons of Brahmā, and to them are wedded the daughters of early Indian cultures.

Another interpretation views ṛṣis as the early movers of civilisation. They were the ones who united separated clans into common value systems and established social orders where power and duty were decentralised. This is certainly hinted by the stories of early ṛṣis and their influence on the Daitya and Āditya tribes. One such early ṛṣi, or ṛṣi prototype, was Bhṛgu. The earliest Bhṛgu is a figure entirely mythic, and his placement in the 1st manvantara tells us that magician-shamans are intrinsic to the roots of Indian civilisation. Various Ṛgvedic hymns together allude that Bhṛgu introduced fire worship to the early Indians. RV 1-58-6 attributes to Bhṛgus the establishment of Agni among humankind, and that this hymn is composed by a Gautama ṛṣi (himself an Āṅgirasa) indicates that the Bhṛgus’ status as bringers of fire-worship was accepted among other ṛṣi families. In other places, such as RV 1-60-1 and 3-5-10, we find that the deity Mātariśvāna gifts Agni to Bhṛgu who then kindles it among men. In RV 3-2-4 and RV 10-46-9 Agni is called Bhṛgu’s gift to humankind, though some read in the latter ‘Manu’ instead of ‘humankind.’

Mythology also calls Bhṛgu a son of Varuṇa, and fire-worship was integral to the later Iranians who worshipped Ahura Mazda (Asura Medha, or Varuṇa). But while the Iranians considered fire pure and threw nothing in it (including corpses), the Vedics considered fire a purifier and cremated their dead. At the earliest layers of mythology, Bhṛgu appears a composite for one who introduced the idea of fire as something sacred and pure, possibly beginning with the advent of cooking. From there different tribes progressed along different paths. In India among the Āryas, Agni was deified and became the ritual route to the Devas. It was the mouth of the gods, and whatever was thrown in it became pure for their consumption. Among the Iranians, the deity Agni was lost even as fire retained primacy in their religion. Bhṛgu’s possible connections with proto-Iranians will come up again later.

Another aspect of Bhṛgu is his dexterity- called dakṣair in RV 10-92-10. RV 4-16-20 refers to a ratha that Bhṛgu once fashioned for Indra, and RV 10-39-14 tells us he did so for the Aśvins as well. A lot has been made about the meaning of ratha in Saṃskṛtam, and whether in all cases it means a literal chariot. Suffice to say that these hymns could easily work at a metaphorical level, in that Bhṛgu introduced the ritual practices that help prepare mind and body (one’s own ratha) to accept Indra and the Aśvins (as names of mental phenomena). The AIT interpretation uses this as evidence that Vedic culture was a foreign import, and that Bhṛgu represents Steppe people who invaded India on their chariots. Such speculations are rendered useless when we find something like the Sinauli chariot, dated to 1900 BC- prior to the arrival of so-called Aryans into India! Not to mention that the vaunted Sintashta chariots have been found to be not that at all.

Mythological Bhṛgu had other sons, but Cyavana and his line appear as the first historically placeable figures in his lineage. Cyavana is considered the father of āyurvedic cyavanprāśa, indicating the antiquity of proto-medicine. The Bhṛgu families were thus holders of sacred knowledge on fire and healing. Cyavana and his descendants are placed around modern Gujarat through their association with Śaryāti, Vaivasvat’s son. This gives them access to the lower bounds of Sindhu and Sarasvatī both, with Narmadā close south. It has historical implications that will manifest in Chapter 4. Another of Bhṛgu’s sons, Uśanas-Śukra or Śukrācārya, is a Bhārgava ṛṣi of legend. He is the chief priest of Dānavas and Daityas in the great ocean churning myth, and maternally is a descendant of Daitya Hiraṇyakaśipu. His daughter marries Yayāti, an early figure in the 7th manvantara. He’s clearly a figure as mythologised as his patriarch, but he appears in history during the transitional period between Deva-Asuras (already mythic history) and Mānavas (present history).

Bhṛgu is directly attributed as the composer of several Ṛgvedic hymns under the name Kavi Bhārgava. All of these are in book 9 of the text, its hymns dedicated exclusively to soma. Another Bhārgava by the name Gṛtsamada features extensively in book 2, his hymns dedicated to Indra, Agni, Rudra and others. Other Bhārgava ṛṣis that feature as Ṛgvedic composers are Somāhuti, Kṛtnu, Nema, Jamadagni and more. But only around 60 of the 1,028 Ṛgvedic hymns feature a Bhārgava as a composer, and the family has no book exclusively as its own- confirming that they were not close to the Pūru-Bhāratas. Instead they appear aligned to their rivals, the Ānavas. Alternately, the prominent Bhārgavas were already history by the Ṛgvedic era, ceding space to other schools such as the Āṅgirasas and Vāsiṣṭhas.

Aṅgiras, another primary mahāṛṣi, is equally mythological a figure. He is referred to in RV 1-45-3, 1-139-9 and 3-31-7. None of these allude to anything historical. Talageri acknowledges that Bhārgava and Āṅgirasa families represent the Ṛgvedic past, that the earliest historical personages among them are remotely mythic by Vedic times, and even the *Vedic Index* classifies Āṅgirasas as semi-mythical beings. Aṅgiras is derived from aṅgārah, the word for charcoal, possibly as aṅgāra + rasa, or the extract of charcoal. A variety of fire-related words stem from aṅgārah- aṅgāraka (heated charcoal), aṅgārakārin (charcoal burner), aṅgārya (heap of charcoal) and more. The Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa affirms that Aṅgira is born of charcoal and derives his name from it. The primary use of charcoal is as a metallurgical fuel. It’s the staple of a blacksmith’s forge, the source of intense heat. If the Bhṛgus were fire-priests who originally brought sacrifice and ritual, then the Āṅgirasas represent priests of fire as applied science. The aṅgāra-ṛṣis, magician-shamans of metallurgy who knew how to extract aṅgāra-rasa. In them was first concentrated the knowledge of copper and bronze, of ore and alloys and the ways in which to mix them. Bhṛgus are originators of ritual and sacrifice, keepers of sacred lore from the Mesolithic and Neolithic ages. Āṅgirasas represent knowledge of the Chalcolithic, of early experiments with throwing shiny things into fire.

The Āṅgirasa family tree is discrepant, especially as the eponymous Aṅgiras is completely mythological a figure. Instead the first historical Āṅgirasas are Bṛhaspati, Dīrghatamās and Saṁvarta. Of these, Bṛhaspati is traditionally the spiritual preceptor of Ādityas, always at odds with Śukra Bhārgava who counsels the Daityas. This may be a projection from later times, when Āṅgirasas aligned themselves with India’s emergent and most significant dynasty- the Bhāratas. Their importance is reflected in the Ṛgveda, where books 6 and 4 are composed almost exclusively by Āṅgirasas.

Vāsiṣṭhas, though aligned with Aikṣvākus in the 7th manvantara, do not yield any historical figures in the early manvantaras. Vasiṣṭha is translated as a superlative of vasu, which means good or excellent. Vasiṣṭha thus means most excellent. Vasu also translates to a desirable object. So Vasiṣṭha can mean master of all objects, or of vasus. In the Vedic age Vāsiṣṭhas are associated with Sudās, a Ṛgvedic hero. As we will see, this aligns Vāsiṣṭhas to both of the two great dynasties of mature SSC. After the ages of specialised magician-shamans, of fire-priests and metallurgy-workers, Vāsiṣṭhas symbolise the emergence of spiritual synthesis. True polymath ṛṣis who carried in them multiple fields of sacred knowledge. While Bhārgava and Āṅgirasa ṛṣis represent prehistoric ages, Vāsiṣṭha ṛṣis are the great religious seers of the current age. Their sacred knowledge contains not the specialisation of fire, nor the cult of soma, nor the metallurgist’s charcoal exaltation. It’s instead a psychological and social manual for how to live life. According to Ellison Findly it encourages truthfulness, devotion, optimism, family life and sharing one’s prosperity with other members of society, among other cultural values. RN Dandekar saw in the Vāsiṣṭhas an attempt at integrating Bhārgava and Āṅgirasa schools. They appear later in chronology too, and we find no Vasiṣṭha in the Daitya-Āditya eras. They appear first through Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi himself, who is almost exclusively the composer of book 7 of the Ṛgveda. His descendants Parāśara Śāktya, Gaurivīti Śāktya and Vasukra are also Ṛgvedic composers, and Parāśara’s son Vyāsa is the final compiler of Vedic literature.

Vyāsa’s lifetime’s work is of synthesis and structure. If at all we are to assign a date to the religion of Hinduism, we must consider Vyāsa a foundational figure for Hindu canon. But his worldview is inherited from his ancestors, the Vāsiṣṭhas, who long sought assimilation in religion and culture. Particularly significant in this are four Ṛgvedic hymns dedicated to the pair Indra and Varuṇa. Indra is the Āṅgirasa totem, a representation of fire as applied science. Varuṇa, the Iranians’ Ahura Mazda, is the Bhṛgu totem. Vasiṣṭha’s Indra-Varuṇa hymns have an “*embedded message of transcending all thoughts of bigotry, suggesting a realistic approach of mutual coordination and harmony between two rival religious ideas by abandoning disputed ideas from each and finding the complementary spiritual core in both*.” They declare Indra and Varuṇa to be complementary and equally great. Vāsiṣṭhas are also holders of yogic knowledge, and were accredited by Ādi Ṣankarācārya as the first expounders of Vedantic philosophy. Other great ṛṣi families such as Ātreyas, Vaiśvāmitras, Agastyas, Kāṇvas and more appear later in history, and we’ll explore their origins Chapter 4 onwards.