---
title: the emergence
sno: 73
---

Zoom in to the level of the Ṛgveda, where experts will tell us we find semi-nomadic pastoralists composing hymns to the Gods of Natural Phenomena. When they want rain, they pray to Indra, the God of Thunder. When they conduct a ritual, they pray to Agni, the God of Fire. For every need they might have, they have a God. A God of Water, and of Wind. A Goddess of Dawn, and of the Rivers. A God here, a Goddess there. Ah, such simple pastoralists, these Vedic Indians. Now remove that foreigner lens, and use that of our own civilisation. Focus again.

The Vedic yajña is the ritual of life, of the individual felt-experience. The physical agni is the flame of consciousness within each of us. Indra, the clarified agency that moves us forward through will. Maruts, the many impulses within us, ready to be channeled at any cause, always at Indra’s vanguard. Soma, the purified consciousness that emerges from life’s yajña, if conducted well, as does ghee from the physical ritual. Uṣā, the radiance of insight that can pierce through our ignorance with beatitude. Sarasvatī, the flow of clear and unabated thinking we need to achieve any life goal.

Jump back thousands of years to the Holocene Onset. Global temperatures are rising, the glacial age is long past. Sea levels increase and coastlines recede, great floods are unleashed. The vast ice sheet that once ranged from the Himālaya to Beijing has now melted. From Pamir, the Paurāṇika Meru, to Kailāsa of modern Tibet, the great world glaciers finally turn to water. The *maho arṇaḥ* are unleashed, and descend the mother rivers of Jambūdvīpa in all directions. In Bhārata we receive Sindhu, Śutudrī, Sarasvatī, Yamunā, Gaṅgā, Brahmaputrā and more. In the new geological epoch that begins, the earliest Indians are remembered by us as Ādityas and Daityas. Now return to the “semi-nomadic pastoralists” building their instruments of sound.

The Āditya commander’s title, Indra, becomes the Ṛgvedic concept of clarified agency. The pre-Holocene state of world rivers locked up in glaciers becomes Vṛtra, and their eventual release is the triumph of Indra over Vṛtra. And yet Indra is a psychological phenomenon within us, as are habits of inaction, sloth, irresponsibility. Vṛtra becomes the dragon within our own minds, that holds us back from achieving our full potential. It is the addiction that keeps one beholden to cigarettes, or the apathy that leads to a lifetime of poor eating and health. The geological Holocene-onset becomes the victory of Indra over Vṛtra, and in turn it is an ultimate call to action for our own minds.It is a fractal maṇḍala. No matter what level you look at, it reiterates the same truths. No matter what tangent you approach from, or what segment of the arc you start from, it always takes you back home. Thousands of years later, when a new layer is woven into our civilisational maṇḍala, the Devas/our psychological phenomena will be named progenitors to a new set of heroes, in the tale we call Mahābhārata. It is the very nature of dharma, of Hinduism, and it argues that we must respect our ancient ancestors far more than we do.

Layers upon layers, each layer the same. Journey to the same Holocene onset, to the time when Svāyambhuva prays to Mahāviṣṇu as the floodwaters claim his lands. Incarnates Varāha and returns the earth above the water surface. A different layer, but still the victory of Indra over Vṛtra. The same story, but weaved onto a different thread. Some time during the era of the above Vedic Indians, in a different part of India, another man’s story will be added to the same thread- Rāma Dāśarathi. Another avatāra. Another layer. But Mahāviṣṇu again. This Rāma travels to southern India, and returns with an idol of Vāmana which he consecrates at Mathurā. Another layer, but Mahāviṣṇu again. Many centuries after Rāma, an Indian born in Mathurā will be added to this thread. We remember him as Kṛṣṇa, an epitome of Mahāviṣṇu. A fractal maṇḍala. Approach from any tangent, land at any level, but you will be returned to the source. To dharma. This is the true beauty of the Bhāratīya code.

Many centuries after Kṛṣṇa still, when Indian civilisation briefly recedes, and the next layers are being added in the forests and the caves, as the Āraṇyakas and the Upaniṣads, our ancestors will look to these fundamental problems again, and draw from the fractal wisdom they inherit. As light on its own, they will argue, is without attributes- or nirguṇa- such is consciousness itself. Pure and undifferentiated. And as light takes the shape and form of what it falls on, so does consciousness- it becomes saguṇa. And this is what was being said in the Ṛgveda too, they will understand. This is why, they will come to realise, Soma is also called Candra, or the Moon. For the moon has no light of its own- it returns what is reflected onto it. And such is the nature of the purified consciousness that emerges in our mental yajña. It does not stand independent, it is what the yajña returns to us of our agni, our lamp of consciousness. And so does the dharma vṛkṣa grow deeper, as generations of Indians build upon the wisdom of their ancestors to form an unbroken chain of civilisational memory and felt-experience. A fecund tree that continues to produce luminary leaves generation after generation, happy jīvas from a happy jana. Always fractal. Always a maṇḍala.

Embedded into every layer such that life becomes a yajña in any activity, for any jīva born to any varṇa and jāti, at any stage of their life. Dance becomes yajña, it becomes a part of dharma. Music becomes yajña, it becomes a part of dharma. To wake with the rising sūrya and prepare one’s physical vessel with namaskara becomes dharma, consonant as it is with ṛta. Every layer the same, the mission always the consonance. In the Ṛgveda this consonance comes through Agni- which rises from Prithvī and reaches Dyaus high above. It is the rodāsi- the great connector. And when we kindle this sacrificial agni within us, the flame of our own consciousness, we are elevated beyond our physical bodies (prithvī) and taken to the transcendent consciousness (dyaus). This too is rodāsi, the great connector. We also call it Yoga- the union. A fractal at any level. A maṇḍala that always brings you home. And here’s the thing about a fractal maṇḍala. Land anywhere on it and ask the people- “*where did you learn this from*?”

“*Oh, this is what we understand from the wisdom of our ancestors*,” they will respond.

This is what the Upaniṣadic thinkers would have said, looking back to their Vedic forebears. This is what the Vedic Indians would have said, inheriting the learnings of the Mahābali and Pṛthu eras. Those eras in turn, we know, looked back at the primal days of Ādityas and Daityas. Long before the Śukra and Bṛhaspati of that time, there were Bhṛgu and Aṅgiras- and where did they get their wisdom from?

Who really knows where creation comes from? Perhaps even the gods do not, for they came after creation. There is no beginning to the maṇḍala, there is no end to it. As eternal as is ṛta, that eternal is dharma. Thus do we call it sanātana.Such were our ancestors, living the eternally dhārmika life. It breeds comfort. It breeds complacence.

Close to two millennia after Veda Vyāsa, the lessons get forgotten again. The fundamental problems of civilisational trajectory again rear their ugly heads, and the jana shows signs of crumbling. Amṛta seems lost, so it is natural that mṛta approaches. Came the Huns, the Scythians, the Greeks, the Iranians and more, and we were painfully reminded of the fundamental problem of conflicting ethos. Rose Kautilya. Rose Vikramāditya. Rose Skandagupta. We drew from our civilisational learnings and stood fast against the foreigners. They retreated, and those that didn’t became us, as Indra and Varuṇa once became one through Vasiṣṭha’s efforts. The fractal deepens such, the mesh grows stronger. The manthana is ever present. The trajectory goes on. The cakra keeps moving. The vartana never stops. Only the vartins are needed. The śākhās proliferated, the dharma vṛkṣa grew vast and spread to distant shores. Bhārata Arrived.

Came the Arabs. Came the Turks. Came the Mongols. Again and again, wave after wave. Incessant challenges, for untold centuries. Breaking down every lesson our civilisation had learnt, rupturing the formation of new layers of wisdom. Hijacking our civilisational trajectory and contaminating it. This was not one religion against another. This was adharma against dharma. For long centuries we were on the losing end. The wheel moves on. Bhārata became Hindustan. And in the beautiful way that only the cosmos can joke with us, from the same part of India that once arose the adhārmika Haihayas- arose the dhārmika Marāthās. A historical maṇḍala if there ever was one. Reclamation was nigh, vindication was nigh. Almost, within grasp. Just a bit more.

Came the Europeans.

And to cut a long story short, we may skip forward to today, when the Hindustan has become India, and the Bhārata begs to be reiterated- to the question of civilisation itself and that of civilisational trajectory. To the reality that ours is still a deeply colonised civilisation, one where our trajectory is relegated as myth or worse- as Hindu revisionism. In reality, our civilisation will not be in full bloom again without repairing all its synaptic connections- and no connection is arguably more important to civilisation than its own history. There is no continuity of consciousness without memory, and there is no continuity of civilisation without history. The project therefore to restore our history, and to understand the deep macrohistorical issues our civilisation has already grappled with and possesses legitimate wisdom on, is a relevant project. It’s a project this book dedicates itself to. And to understand the issues our civilisation has already grappled with, we may list the fundamental issues of civilisational trajectory itself.

Every civilisational trajectory is different, but all deal with some common and fundamental problems. All civilisations are fated to face the same problems, bottlenecks and existential dilemmas. What differentiates them is how they react to them. These problems must be addressed for a civilisation to progress or sustain itself. When we view from this lens, we will find that there is good case to consider that the Indian civilisation is furthest ahead on trajectory, having already resolved problems that other civilisations continue to face and struggle with. For this very reason, the inherent and specific problems of the Indian civilisation are for it to solve on its own. Civilisations like the West, which are behind us in trajectory, can give us no real solutions. This argument acknowledges that civilisational-India is today in an advanced state of decay, but makes the point that our reviving wisdom will come only from within, not without.

We should begin with a working definition of a civilisation, and understand what makes it different to culture, clan, tribe, country and/or family. Civilisation is an aggregation of humanity with distinct features absent in lesser cultures- monumental architecture, writing, organised agriculture and industry, long-distance trade, a common unit of weights and measures. Not that lesser cultures cannot have one or more of these elements, but that the full combination compounds to a civilisational condition of existence. In some cases, a culture may turn into a civilisation pending further discovery. Take the example of the Ochre-Coloured Pottery Culture (OCP) found in parts of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan. Though it is still called a culture, new findings lead us to believe that it was as fledged a civilisation as its contemporary- the Harappan- and even that the two need not be considered mutually exclusive. On occasion we may find a singular artefact, like the monumental megalith of Gobekli Tepe in modern Turkey, but till we know more we have no way of identifying what ‘civilisation’ it was a part of.

And yet this is but the external definition of civilisation, or how it would be defined from outside. As a felt-experience, Yasuda Yoshinory provided a different definition of civilisation. He asserted that a principle to identify civilisation was a respect for and co-existence with nature- “*Civilisation begins to appear when a workable system for living, that is a proper relationship between man and nature, is established in accord with the features of a given region*.”

Viewed this way, it should not be too difficult to see how the capitalist - consumerist - materialistic - individualistic model of Western civilisation is unsustainable, and does not even possess a true workable system for living. If nothing else, Yoshinory’s definition reminds us that a civilisation is not measured by its shiny objects, rising towers and fast modes of transport, but by how it has solved fundamental problems of co-existence with the rest of reality (or nature, in the local sense)- both for society and individual. We may create technical definitions like ‘negative externalities,’ ‘carbon-offset’ and even ‘sustainability.’ But these more represent desperate coping mechanisms than workable systems.

As its most fundamental unit, civilisational proto-trajectory begins at the individual. But given that our species is a social animal from the eras of primate ancestry, we can bypass the individual unit for a macrohistoric exercise. Understanding even the family unit this way, we arrive instead at the smallest treatable unit- the clan or tribe. This is an aggregation of families, united through common descent and consequently a shared ancestral memory. Inevitably, a shared ancestral memory implies a shared belief system, or worldview. It also includes a harmony of vocations- defined and complementary roles for different members of the tribe. From the POV of civilisational trajectory, no fundamental problems arise for a single tribe, united by blood and ancestry. Leadership structures and hierarchies are relatively simple, and there isn’t much complexity or variation in vocations. The group size is small enough for conflicts to be transparently resolved, and competition is managed within a healthy intra-tribe ecosystem.

The problems begin when we deal not with one but at least two tribes. What we have in this situation is two separate ancestry sets, and likely separate deities, values and vocations. Now fundamental questions arise- how are these two tribes to interact? What ought to be the power equation? Given their interaction they are now likely upon a common resource pool- how should it be shared? And to put it realistically- how are multiple tribes to interact in these circumstances?