---
title: flood myth revisited, or matsyavatara
sno: 43
---

The Bhāgavata Purāṇa tells us that in his previous life Vaivasvat was a king of Draviḍadeśa named Śraddhādeva. This is our only hint of his possible location prior to the flood. He’s visited in his lifetime by Viṣṇu in the form of a fish, who warns him of the coming disaster and advises him to prepare accordingly. There is a temptation to see in the Hindu conception of avatāras a parallel with evolution as modern science has described it. The usual articulation is to point to a journey: Matsya - Kurma - Varāha - Narasiṃha - Vāmana - Paraśurāma - Rāma - Kṛṣṇa - Buddha, and claim that it represents the evolution of life from an aquatic to mammalian state, then to hominid, then to modern man and finally to the philosophical man. But a true chronology of Indian history renders this allegory untenable. Varāha is clearly the first avatāra to manifest, and both Narasiṃha and Vāmana incarnate long before Matsya appears on the scene.

The break in Indian skeletal record in 4500 BC could be the marker of a cataclysm, but we otherwise have no evidence of any great catastrophe during this period. We place Vaivasvat here as a broad consensus of several different traditions, which makes it convenient for narrative. As always, all of our chronology could be off by 500-1000 years (or more!), and that of the Mesolithic period could be completely off. That Indian traditions give us hints to our history is certain, but that we could date these things with certitude is not. Maybe the entire flood myth is a fabrication here, a way for later composers to both, add a story of Viṣṇu’s incarnation, and make the origins of this manvantara mirror those of the first. But what’s certain is Vaivasvat’s central role in the genesis of early Indian tribes. Whatever the nature of his flood myth, he is placed in the aftermath at Ayodhyā. But we must confess that this may not necessarily be modern Ayodhyā but any settlement in that part of the Gangetic Plains. Ancient settlements were often destroyed by flooding or even conquest- for it’s relatively easy to destroy simple wood structures.

The main kingdom of Ayodhyā descends to Vaivasvat’s eldest son, Ikṣvāku. From him emerges one of Indian history’s most prominent dynasties, the Aikṣvākus. Since they are descended from Vivasvān the Sūrya, they are also called Sūryavaṁśa. Ikṣvāku’s second son, Nimi, migrates north and establishes a kingdom in Nepal and northern Bihar. His dynasty of Janakas feature consistently in history, their daughter Sitā marrying Rāma Dāśarathī. Vaivasvat’s daughter, Ilā, is married to Budha the Soma and their son Purūrava establishes his own kingdom near the Gaṅgā-Yamunā confluence, named Pratiṣṭhāna. Descended from Soma or Candra, this dynasty of Ailās (sons of Ilā) will also be called the Somavaṁśa. The Purāṇas are strange with Ilā’s gender, briefly changing her into a son named Sudyumna who fathers Gaya and Utkala. Gaya and Utkala establish their own kingdoms in modern Chhattisgarh and Orissa respectively, and Pargiter speculated them to be Austroasiatic speakers retroactively linked to Vaivasvat Manu. Yet another son of Manu migrates to Gujarat and founds the kingdom of Ānarta at Kuśasthalī (which will later be Dvārakā). Another son migrates to north Bihar, where his descendants will later emerge as the Vaiśālī dynasty.

This well describes the formative period of PIE, Tibeto-Burman, Dravidian and Austric languages. While one-to-one mappings of tribes to languages is tenuous given our time frame, Manu’s other sons who went to Gaya and Utkala could represent early Austric speakers. Left behind in the Tibetan Plateau, tribes like Yakṣas, Gandharvas and Apsarās speak a kind of pre-Tibeto-Burman. And encountering southern tribes establishing maritime activities in Gujarat, Orissa and Bengal, other Mānavas come into contact with Dravidian language speakers. Of course, this is likely a second occurrence of such a phenomenon. A previous occurrence was during the age of Svāyambhuva Manu, the original ethnogenesis of Eurasian populations.

Purūrava, the son of Ilā, marries an Apsarā named Urvaśī. An interesting speculation emerges here when we consider Urvaśī as ‘ur-vaasi,’ or resident of Ur. Ur is a Sumerian city that dates from at least 3800 BC, and a royal tomb found there contained a female buried with the statues of two rams. Urvaśī too is associated with two rams, lending support to the speculation that she was a maiden of Ur. We know that Apsarās were a tribe of people, somewhat affiliated to the Gandharvas, who were spread all across Jambūdvīpa in the ancient eras. It’s not inherently surprising that Ur might have been an Apsarā city, and Sumer itself an Apsarā civilisation and named as a better version of where they originated from- Meru (Su-Meru translating as Good or Better Meru). Given that the word Sumer comes from Akkadian, and that the Sumerians likely called their land Kengir, this appears as wild speculation. But it’s an example of how a new look at Indian history offers fresh narrative avenues. Let’s add here the traditional Gandharva association with music, and the prevalence today of Tuvan music in lands the Gandharvas were historically associated with- Eastern China, Mongolia and surrounding areas. Gandharva music is described as being the sound of nature, melodic in its mimicry of wind, bird and animal sounds. Any YouTube video of Tuvan singing today appears precisely no different. How is anyone possessed of genuine historical curiosity not piqued by the many ways Paurāṇika accounts mirror reality?

Of Purūrava’s many sons, Āyu the eldest inherits the kingdom at Pratiṣṭhāna. Kingdoms at this stage are of course little more than chiefdoms of a few villages, bound together by cultural, marital and social contracts. Another son, Amāvasu, migrates north along the Gaṅgā (or west of Pratiṣṭhāna) and establishes a kingdom at Kanyākubja, modern Kannauj. Āyu marries the daughter of Vṛṣaparvaṇa, a Dānava, and fathers many sons of whom Nahuṣa is the eldest. Nahuṣa expands the kingdom to the Sarasvatī, and thus are the pre-Vedic people first brought to the river their civilisation will eventually flourish on. This brings Nahuṣa into contact with the Nāga people of Ānarta in modern Gujarat, commencing cultural contact between Ailās and Nāgas remembered in myths of Nahuṣa’s rebirth as a serpent. Another son of Āyu migrates east and establishes the kingdom of Kāśī near modern Varanasi.

Nahuṣa’s elder son Yati abdicates the throne and becomes an ascetic. The kingdom thus descends to Yayāti. One of Yayāti’s wives is the daughter of Uśanas-Śukra, a Bhṛgu ṛṣi. We see through tradition that Vaivasvat Manu’s era represents a kind of closure period for the age of Gods and Demons. But magician-shamans will continue to exist through the descendants of Uśanas and other Bhārgavas, the Āṅgirasas who aid Ādityas then the Bhāratas, the Vāsiṣṭhas who provide sacred order to Aikṣvāku tribes, and the Āgastyas, Vaiśvāmitras and others who soon arrive on the scene. They are inheritors of sacred knowledge, of the ancient astronomy and history of cultures, of play with sound and words, with fire and ritual. Their hymns encode the knowledge of seasons, of barley and copper, of timber and architecture, of practices yogic and tantric, of the several thousands of years from deep Palaeolithic for which humans have been living in India and transmitting tales to their children. Beginning with Yayāti Nāhuṣya, we’ll explore the early arc of this period through the tales of its cakravartins.