---
title: flood myth, or varahavatara
sno: 26
---

Svāyambhuva Manu and his early progeny populate Indian protohistory. We technically have no way to date them, for as mythic composites they could have been transmitted for an unknown number of generations. But with the onset of Holocene, the resultant rise both in global sea waters and in riverine waters, along with Indian tradition’s own suggestions for onset of major Satya Yuga and the first Madurai that was lost to the sea, we find support for such an occurrence in Svāyambhuva’s life. The genealogies tell us that four generations after Manu are born the Daityas and Ādityas, but that he is alive to witness the beginnings of conflict.

While Manu and his people are dedicated to simple Devī worship, the Daityas-Ādityas commence upon a more specialised religious trajectory. Tribal totems become important, and as elder cousins the Daityas are not impressed by Ādityan attempts to break from established norms. Hiraṇyākṣa, the elder Daitya, is the first to stir trouble. He marches upon Vibhāvarī, Varuṇa’s capital (which is placed north of Meru), and challenges the latter to battle. But Varuṇa submits to his banner, so Hiraṇyākṣa turns to Viṣṇu next. Armed with nothing but a club, as is expected for a man in the Mesolithic era, Hiraṇyākṣa scours the earth for his enemy. The description reads like a massive earthquake and global deluge. Hiraṇyākṣa pounds the earth with his club, breaking apart mountains and opening deep gorges. Then he plunges all of earth under water- the global deluge, the melting of snow and rise of water levels both oceanic and riverine.

This obviously disturbs the affairs of Manu and his people, who appeal to Viṣṇu to intervene. Thus manifests the universal deity in his Varāha, or Great Boar, avatāra. The battle that occurs between Varāha and Hiraṇyākṣa is also remembered as the first of twelve major Deva-Asura wars. Varāha kills the Daitya and restores earth upon the water surface, giving land back for Svāyambhuva Manu and his descendants to populate. The Matsya and Viṣṇu Purāṇa make no mention of Hiraṇyākṣa in their Varāhāvatāra tale, which reads in them only as a cataclysm and origin myth that well maps to the deluges humanity could have faced when glaciers, ice-sheets and icebergs melted in the Holocene. Some of these memories are carried over to consequent stories. Parts of Hiraṇyakaśipu’s following war with Narasiṁha echo a widespread earthquake, and his death is said to create the earth, time, the moon, the sky, planets, the sun, rivers, mountains and oceans.

The Sarga stories thus represent Indian conceptions of creation, biogenesis and human origin. From a historical point of view, they tell us what the ‘earliest identifiable Indians’ thought of their own past, while hinting at geological events that help assign plausible dates to these Indians. Even at inception Indian tradition is the coalescence of several different prehistoric memories, the maṇḍala is without a beginning. We do not really know when Svāyambhuva lived, or when the Daitya and Āditya tribes came into prominence. But we can surmise that these were the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic eras with little organised ritual, and widespread goddess worship and matrilineality. The Holocene onset, or Hiraṇyākṣa’s war with Viṣṇu, or the earthquake and flood remembered in Svāyambhuva’s tale, these represent the switch from prehistory to history. It’s the end of Sarga, of Primary Creation. What follows is the development of a semi-nomadic tribal order, a generations-long conflict between Daityas and Ādityas (or Asuras and Devas), and the eventual emergence of a Neolithic political order that seeds true Indian civilisation. We thus move beyond the Holocene now and visit the millennia following 10000 BC.