# fractals in the mandala

Index: 5.8
S. No: 35
Type: 📑 manuscript

What does our fractal maṇḍala contain by this point, after thousands of years of nomadic, war-ridden, pre-agricultural life in India? We may notice, to begin with, that even before the efforts of our ancestors to will themselves into an organic unity, there were intuitions to a common origin. Whether through Brahmā, or through Svāyambhuva, or through the likes of Kaśyapa and Dakṣa, Indian historical memory remembers that despite our manifold differences, we all emerge from the same source. It remembers patriarchs in the form of Prajāpatis and matriarchs through Diti, Aditi, Danu and more. It keenly remembers that we began from a wild and arboreal past, no different to that of animals, and that in time we made a bargain and domesticated ourselves. Far from being ahistorical, it is remarkably consistent. It speaks first of humans subsisting on whatever nature provided in raw form, and then of the early pickings of untilled grain, before it reaches discernibly agricultural stages.

It shows our ancestors dealing with fundamental problems on the civilisational trajectory that we deal with even now. When we see rampant genocide in the modern world, we know that humans have still not solved the fundamental problem of multiple conflicting tribes- of us vs. them. When we argue over definitions of democracy, worry about its fall, and look down on solutions of the kind being followed in China, we realise that the fundamental problem of civilisational leadership is still unresolved. The problem with established narratives of Indian history is that they ignore or dismiss the early layers of our felt-experience. They deny to us the memory of Svāyambhuva and the early matriarchs, of the layer in our proto-history where order first came through ancestral wisdom and elderly authority- through those who have managed to survive and reproduce before us. The very first lesson embedded into the fractal was respect for *traditio*, and lest we consider that some kind of final solution we are shown how it breaks down as well. In Tvaṣtṛ’s rivalries with Indra, in the increasing distances between the children of Diti, Aditi and Danu, and in the rise of different ṛṣi lineages we see that there could even be the problem of conflicting *traditios*.

We also learn of how far the fractal once spread, which makes sense if we understand that *traditio*, in itself, was not the exclusive preserve of ancient Indians- even if it’s here that it was crystallised into dharma. The countless stories of migrations away from India echo the subcontinent’s status as humanity’s second primordial home (outside of Africa). Through legends of Priyavrata’s descendants we are reminded that the borders of the modern world are just that- recent and illusory. For hundreds of thousands of years human species have migrated and travelled in all directions, sometimes taking languages with them, sometimes genes, sometimes both and other times neither. In isolated stories such as that of Yogasiddhā, we learn how deep might the roots of Indian influence be in regions such as Japan, Manchuria and the Koreas.

And then there is the Samudra Manthana, readily identifiable as an early attempt by ancestral Indians to will themselves into an organic unity. Looked this way, we understand both the relevance of ‘chronology’ as history and also the limits of its reach. The material hints we glean about Samudra Manthana tell us that it comes from a pre-agricultural, pre-metallurgical era. This is a salient detail, and we must not dismiss it a-chronologically. But as a macro-historical memory of our civilisational felt-experience, to what extent does it matter whether the event dates from 5000 BC, 7000 BC or 9000 BC? Are the lessons we learn from the event not more salient? That underlying a peaceful settlement among conflicting interests is a fair sharing of resources? That regardless of specific differences, overall progress requires a finding of common ground- as Śukra and Bṛhaspati did? Do we really need genetics to tell us of the antiquity and commonality of our Indian lineage? Thousands of years after such eras, when the Vedic period dawns, a new generation of Indians will look back to this time and draw from it, embedding further wisdom at different levels of the fractal. But the wheel of time moves on, civilisation rises and falls, and Indian tradition remembers this.