---
title: geography of the ancient world
sno: 34
---

Paurāṇika geography is a layered body of astronomy, cosmology, symbolism and actual geography. In this book we follow the geography set in The Geography of the Puranas by S. Muzafer Ali. He compiles the various Paurāṇika accounts of geography and places them within a plausible context, identifying critical locations such as Meru. All Purāṇas begin their account with Priyavrata, who conquers the known world and divides it among his sons such:

1. Jambūdvīpa – Inherited by Agnīdhra, the eldest son. At the continent level this is our continent, the land of the ancient Indians. This includes the entire Indian subcontinent, the Pamir Knot to the north of Kashmir, and all of Central Asia from the Caspian Sea in the west to Mongolia in the east. At a cultural level this could also be called Greater India.
2. Plakṣadvīpa – Inherited by Medhātithi. This corresponds to the Mediterranean ring including Greek and Italy in the north and the tip of northern Africa in the south. If prehistoric Indians did migrate there, it could explain the Greek origin myth of their original Dionysus hailing from India.
3. Śalmalīdvīpa – Inherited by Vapuṣmat. This corresponds to the belt of islands in the Arabian Sea leading up to Madagascar, and possibly includes the Horn of Africa. A number of unexplored connections between Egyptian, Ethiopian and Indian myths could lie in the prehistoric genesis of Śalmalīdvīpa.
4. Kuśadvīpa – Inherited by Jyotiṣmat. This corresponds to eastern Anatolia and the Middle-East, including Iran. Is culturally and commercially the most affiliated with Jambūdvīpa throughout history.
5. Krauñcadvīpa – Inherited by Dyutimat, its actual correspondence is uncertain. Ali places it in Western Russia and northern Europe, including Scandinavia. This arguably is the ‘Aryan’ homeland Western civilisation searches for.
6. Śākadvīpa – Inherited by Bhavya. Corresponds to South-East Asia, from Myanmar and Thailand to Indonesia. It comes into Indian focus through the dispersal of Austroasiatic languages and related cultures, such as wetland rice farming.
7. Puṣkaradvīpa – Inherited by Savala. Corresponds to Eastern Siberia, Manchuria, Korea and Japan. Placement of this is more tentative than the rest, and genetic data hints the connection is highly ancient.

Jambūdvīpa, inherited by Agnīdhra, was further divided into subregions that went to his sons. At the north end are the regions of Uttarakuru and Candradvīpa. Uttarakuru corresponds to the Russian plains east of the Urals, watered by the Ob river (Bhadrasoma to the ancient Indians). Candradvīpa is the region around modern Lake Baikal, which has the shape of a crescent moon, or Candra. Information on these two regions is extremely sparse, which makes sense given their distance from Bhāratavarṣa. They are populated by tribes largely unknown to Indian tradition- Caraṇas, Aruṇas and Garuḍas. Of these, the latter’s connection to mythological Garuḍa is unclear. But it’s curious that the Purāṇas place the Garuḍas near modern Mongolia, and Garuḍa is a major part of Mongolian mythology even today.

Moving south we are met with the regions of Hiraṇmaya and Ramaṇaka, and to Ali these might have been the same region. They are known to the Purāṇas as the home to various raiding tribes that troubled the settled people south of them- Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Uragas, Siddhas, Kinnaras and more. They correspond to modern Kazakhstan and the northern parts of Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. Paurāṇika mountain ranges such as Jarudhi and Śṛṅgavān fall within these regions. South of them are the regions culturally most aligned to Bhāratavarṣa- Ketumāla and Bhadravarṣa. Ketumāla covers southern Uzbekistan, northern Iran and all of Turkmenistan- the watering grounds of the Oxus river (Cakṣu in the Purāṇas). It was home to several Āditya, Daitya, Kinnara, Pannāga and other tribes, and often we find names like Indra, Varuṇa and Viṣṇu roaming these lands. Bhadravarṣa corresponds to modern Xinjiang and northern China, home to several Āditya tribes and the famous Deva abode- the mountain of Devakūṭa.

And south of them, finally, is the land known as Bhāratavarṣa- our land. Home to many ranges such as Gandhamādana, Mālyavān, Niṣadha, Hemakūṭa and Himavān. This is the land where all consequent stories are set. Genetics and further discoveries in archaeology may yet uncover that the Indian subcontinent was an ancient incubation ground of both population and civilisation. We already know that India is the second greatest population hotspot of ancient humanity, outside of Africa. It’s accepted that between 50,000-30,000 years ago humans migrated from southern India to the many islands of Oceania all the way up to Australia and New Zealand. We should therefore not be too arrogant in our dismissal of the ancient Indian idea of people spreading across the world from a single source. At a genetic level this has already happened at least twice, the second time from the Indian subcontinent. Here’s some supporting data:

- Australian ancestors in the distant past lived in the Indian subcontinent for a few generations before their migration.
- The D paternal haplogroup likely originated in India in the Paleolithic era and went to all of East Asia.
- MtDNA R30 and yDNA D2, which are prominent in Japan, originated in India 25,000 years ago. The memory of Puṣkaradvīpa? And will reputationists deride this as Eastward Ho?
- The journey and spread of ancestral clade F* suggest that India was a pivotal prehistoric thoroughfare.
- The paternal lineages H and K* are native to India.
- Even the paternal haplogroup R1, from which descended the purported Aryans with R1a ancestry, originated in India. Both the R and Q ancestries descend from the P haplogroup, which itself was rooted in the Indian subcontinent.
- The Eastern Himālaya is a primordial and primitive cradle of ethnogenesis- the formation and development of ethnic groups.
- The yDNA haplogroup O originated in the Eastern Himālaya and eventually spread up to Yunan and the Pearl river delta.

Priyavrata and his family’s story seems to affirm this protohistory. Their absence from the earliest myths, and their presence only in geographical accounts, hints that they were people that migrated away. All we know of them is the lands they went to, and our own stories focus on the people that remained on native soil. Despite overwhelming genetic data, for the purpose of historical narrative we’ll take the representation of the known world as one that ancient Indians discovered as already existent- not one they created. Accordingly, deeper geographical details about continents such as Śalmalī, Krauñca, Plakṣa and Śāka are meager. We know better about Kuśadvīpa, our immediate neighbour. And we know Jambūdvīpa best, since it was our own continent. Key to identifying Jambūdvīpa’s geography is locating Meru, the great center of the continent. Ali convincingly identifies this as the Pamir Knot, the Roof of the World, a low plateau surrounded by high peaks on all sides. North of Meru are the mountain ranges Nīla, Śveta and Śṛṇgavān while on the south are Niṣadha, Hemakūṭa and Himālaya. A detailed map of this entire geography is given in the appendix.

We can see that Jambūdvīpa encompasses a large swathe of land, and this forms the greater Indian cultural sphere of the ancient world. Daityas, Ādityas, Dānavas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Apsarās, Rākṣasas, Kimpuruṣas, Kinnaras, Piśācas, Vānaras and Mānavas inhabit this land, interacting with each other over the millennia in manners both congenial and hostile. Relations with Hiraṇmaya and Ramaṇaka are the most distant, as is to be expected. So much that people inhabiting those lands are considered barbarians, without religion, and disrespectful of the cultured folk. They frequently raid southern settlements, stealing cattle, grain, wood and whatever else catches their fancy. Uttarakuru and Bhadravarṣa are undoubtedly allied lands. There are both friends and enemies to be found here but the larger cultural and religious milieu is the same. Bhārgava, Āṅgirasa and other ṛṣis hold equal sway here, and through the great Pamir Knot, or Meru, humans migrate between these countries and Bhāratavarṣa as if they are all the same land. Indeed, when an ambitious Indra sought dominion, or when a Mahābali conquered all three realms, Uttarakuru and Bhadravarṣa were a part of their conquests. This makes sense when we understand that in these lands are all the great passes and thoroughfares through which eastern and western Eurasia have interacted, a point hammered home by the West’s enduring interest in Afghanistan, and modern China’s activities in Tibet, Xinjiang, Ladakh and adjoining areas.

Except that dominion in 8000 BC would have been of a very different nature. Conquest among a nomadic and Neolithic populace meant establishing a broad line of control, a hierarchy of tribes and tribal leaders that was accepted within the larger world and sanctioned by those that all submitted to- the ṛṣis. It meant taking control of the sparse and few settlements that existed along key migratory and trade routes, such that one could control how all of humanity interacted with each other. The conquests would have been more of contract and trust, for armies could not be summoned in those days at instant notice and sent marching hundreds of kilometers away. And violations of these social contracts would have invited hostility from all allied tribes, as it did in all the Deva-Asura wars we’ve visited. But as the Neolithic populace advances, as it learns to cultivate crops and to mine the earth, and it begins to settle down. Surplus in food production results in a population boom. Settlements can now grow larger and more complex. Relatively egalitarian tribal structures give way to specialisation of labour and information. This is the dawn of civilisation, and it’s chronicled in detail by Indian tradition.