---
title: gods, demons and history
sno: 32
---

We started our journey at Svāyambhuva Manu, placing him near the 10th millennium BC though his memory could date from a much older time. But our degree of certainty is higher when we place Daityas and Ādityas between the 9th and 7th millennia BC. Recall that genetics finds no notable foreign influx into India between 65,000 years BP and the 7th millennium BC. These varied tribes were thus all equally indigenous, their ancestors, culture and religions thriving on Indian soil for countless generations. Their stories paint a picture of semi-nomadic people with very few permanent settlements. Descriptions of cities are mythic and fantastical- great iron palaces and magical flying vehicles- an indication that later historians had little to no details available to them and filled in with imagination. Tribes are described as bubbles- they appear and disappear with equal suddenness. This is how one would describe a nomadic life, where the people who are here today move on tomorrow. There are no hints of organised agriculture, though animal husbandry is clearly prevalent. There’s no advanced metallurgy, but antecedents for experiments with construction and fire are available. When the tales were passed down for the following many millennia, what the Indians of the time were trying to tell us was this:

“*We have very little memory left from thousands of years ago, from the first few manvantaras of our reckoning. And what is available to us is wrapped in so much myth that we too see it as a body to add our myths to. It’s not that we were without a historical sense. It’s that as our history faded with time our hold on the specificities weakened. Were the Nāgas originally a tribe of people that wore mongoose skins and worshipped snakes, or were they Lizard People themselves? Was Hiraṇyakaśipu a great demon? If he was, then our Lord too incarnated as a Beast to vanquish him. Did Indra truly slay a dragon called Vṛtra? If he did then he must be a Deva himself, for only a Deva can take on such a supernatural power. Surely it must be a demon who hinders the ritual of a sage, or a monster who tries to prevent a Prahlāda from devotion , or a tyrant who hinders the life of his subjects. Tāraka had to be an Asura, if it took the combined might of all Ādityas, Rudras and more to truly defeat him.*”

“*There were power battles then, like there are in our time. There were internecine rivalries where brother envied brother, conflicts where loyalties were tested and none could be neutral. We remember them as twelve major wars, but who can say how many there really were? All we know is that for three thousand years or more, a vast landscape of human tribes interacted in all sorts of ways through which emerged the cultural and religious bedrock of our current traditions. The early matriarchs gave way to later goddesses, the first Prajāpatis overshadowed by their later sons. Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā became Dyaus and Prithvī, who in turn became Puruṣa and Prakṛtī, and the antecedents of our own civilisation are found within. Through Māyā, the architect of the Daityas, we know that our ancestors experimented with construction and architecture. Through Tvaṣṭṛ and Śukra, master-crafters, we know that a science of weapon-making and warcraft had seen genesis. Through Kāmadhenu the mythic cow we know that these humans had sensed the great potential of earth*.”

“*But conflict impedes progress, a lack of cooperation hinders the great efforts of humanity that take civilisation forward. Those early ancestors did try to get their act together. After generations of warfare Indra and Bali shook hands, resolving to bring together their combined resources and establish civilisation. They began to mine the earth and it threw ash, lava and fire back- the great Hālāhala that only Rudras, those who stayed in those mountains, mines and caves- knew how to contain. Humans are not supposed to penetrate deep into the earth, and initially the mountains fell onto the hollowed caves. Then we learnt how to prop things up, how to defy the earth’s inclination to crush and grind, and how to penetrate it. The monsters within were conquered, doorways into the earth were opened and all kinds of shiny things could be extracted. A few more centuries of this and available to us would be ores, lapis lazuli and more*.”

“*Of course these treasures are personified as goddesses, Lakṣmī foremost among them. For goddesses have a mind of their own, they come and go as they please. Wealth today is gone tomorrow, the goddesses can both lure us and be coaxed away. These goddesses are Apsarās too, for there’s no shame in denying that we desire them. Why would we even milk the earth if we were not desirous of wealth, ownership and dominion? And the earth is a gift that keeps giving, like the Kāmadhenu cow. So why stop there? We tamed the elephant and the horse, like we’d earlier tamed cattle. We were regents of the land, owners of it all. We learnt to use the roots and shoots for healing, to press the earth’s products into service when our own bodies would resist our will*.”

There is thus fair reason to consider Devas and Asuras as something protohistoric. Their tales do not give us the details of history but tease at larger patterns. The movement of narrative from stories of Daityas and Ādityas to stories of Mānavas, the children of Manu, is a living representation of the transformation of history to mythology and mythology to religion. It’s what happens when the paradigm of a current age becomes the past to another, over and over again. On the surface, the Samudra Manthana appears an aptly mythological story. A great conflict between Gods and Demons for immortality, where cosmic oceans are churned and divine gifts are extracted. The final extraction from the ocean churning is of amṛta, a potion that the mythology indicates to be an elixir of immortality. But amṛta and its churning represent something else- an early discernible formulation of dharma. Let us see how, through unpacking the meaning of amṛta. On the surface, it is simply a + mṛta, where mṛta is death. Amṛta is thus the opposite of death, making it a suitable name for the elixir of immortality. But mṛta is not simply death, it is the end of ṛta- it is the end of the natural order, it is pralaya, non-being, and non-existence. Therefore, as the opposite of mṛta, amṛta is the sustenance of ṛta, the upholding of ṛta. And what is another name for that which upholds ṛta? Dharma!

The Samudra Manthana is not a fantastical tale of Gods and Demons churning out the elixir of immortality. It is a civilisational memory of the time when our earliest tribes began establishing an order among themselves. Led by the early ṛṣis, Śukrācārya and Bṛhaspati, and after countless ruthless wars, the Daitya and Āditya tribes attempted a negotiation- a movement towards settled civilisation and cooperation. They did so through the idea of dharma, initially formulated by Śukra but soon shared and encouraged by Bṛhaspati (Bhṛgus and Aṅgirasas). It is arguably the first discernible attempt by Indians to will themselves into organic unity. With this great negotiation struck, Indian civilisation finally embarked upon Neolithic advancement- on the road that would soon yield Mehrgarh, Bhirrana, Rakhigarhi, Lahuradewa and more.

Deva-Asura wars don’t stop at the Samudra Manthana. They continue well into the 7th manvantara where they are historical events for the likes of Yayāti and Nahuṣa, which is where we’ll pick them up again. We began our journey with Svāyambhuva Manu and the onset of a major Satya Yuga cycle. This Satya Yuga lasts for 4,800 years and brings us to 6702 BC as the date for onset of major Tretā Yuga. The major Satya Yuga then covers the era of Gods and Demons, the true mythological age of Indian history. There exists a kind of truth to the later conception of the Satya Yuga as a moral age, one where the cow of dharma had all four legs intact. In reality the age was of true amoralism, an age before the urbane concerns of later Indians were directed towards ownership, property and propriety. To switch to the next age, we need notice a peculiar trait in Indian tradition.