---
title: the great war
sno: 71
---

In the prelude to the Mahābhārata on the Kuru side, the primary line continues under Pratīpa, who abdicates late in life and hands rule to his second son, Śāntanu. The elder son, Devāpi, likely became a ṛṣi, for he’s named composer of RV 10-98 as Devāpi Āṛṣṭiṣeṇa. Here he appeals for rains on behalf of his brother, Śāntanu. The hymn repeatedly refers to him as son of Ṛṣṭiṣeṇa, which means that Paurāṇika genealogies forgot at least a generation between Pratīpa and Śāntanu. These are the final rulers mentioned in the Ṛgveda, confirming the closure of the compositional period. The hymn gives us no clue on Śāntanu’s geographical placement, but the Purāṇas place him along the northern Gaṅgā. The Sarasvatī’s drying offers us a reason for this. In their paper titled “Sarasvatī in the Mahābhārata – A Study,” Sastry and Kalyanasundaram analyse all occurrences of ‘Sarasvatī’ in the Mahābhārata to reveal some telling observations:

- The Sarasvatī is an ancient river with great importance to the Bhāratas.
- Its banks are home to Āryas, a term which by the Mahābhārata’s era comes to mean ‘noble’ and ‘decent.’
- The river is not entirely in the past. Its waters and trail feature extensively in the Mahābhārata’s landscape.
- Though in much lesser force during the Mahābhārata than it was during the Ṛgvedic period, the river is still navigable.

When reviewing the cities associated with Sarasvatī, especially the description of Nagadhanvana as the spot where the river turns east (when starting from the south where it meets the ocean), it’s compelling to associate the city with Kalibangan, which is abandoned some time during this period. Thus, as is reiterated throughout this book, the Sarasvatī evidence is clinching in the chronology and evaluation of Indian history. It makes untenable both- dating the Ṛgveda to after 2000 BC, and dating the Mahābhārata to before 2000 BC. On whether the modern Ghaggar-Hakra truly is the ancient Sarasvatī, while there are reputationists who still hold out, the consensus is near unanimous among a cross section of geographers, geologists, archaeologists and historians/linguists (including HH Wilson, Max Muller and Monier-Williams). We’ve already seen reasons to delink Ṛgvedic Sarasvatī with Avestan Haraxvaiti.

The consequence of an elaborate prelude to the Mahābhārata is the setting up of principal characters and their own narrative trajectories. Before the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas arrive on the scene, we are already met with figures such as Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Vicitravīrya, Citrāṅgada, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu. The nature of the epic is thus markedly different from the other one, which is the tale of one man’s journey. The Mahābhārata on the other hand, as its name suggests, is a tale of all of India- its many sons, daughters, fathers, sisters, husbands, wives and other characters. The premise serves only as a set-up, a focal point for the narrative to revolve around and move plot forward. Though Dhṛtarāṣṭra is eldest of his generation he is also blind, thus the rule passes to Pāṇḍu, the younger. The Kurus are at this stage a small, albeit militarily mighty kingdom. Previous generations, including Bhīṣma, have waged successive expansion campaigns and established their kingdom as a legitimate successor to the Pūru-Bhāratas of the Ṛgvedic era. The realms they subdued, conquered or made alliance with appear as mahājanapadas in a much later period- Madra, Magadha, Daśārṇa, Kāśī, Mithilā, Suhma, Puṇḍra and more. The unmistakable direction of this, east of Kuru lands, reiterates that to their west are the drying, desiccating and abandoned Sarasvatī plains. But allies are found beyond this no-man’s land, where kingdoms such as Kekaya and Madra are still late-Ānava, and Gāndhāra even beyond is decidedly a part of Bhāratavarṣa.

To Pāṇḍu is married Kuntī, who is sister to Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa’s biological father. A son is born out of wedlock to Kuntī prior to this marriage, and under the name Karṇa he is adopted by the ruler of Aṅga. To Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the ruler of Gāndhāra named Subala gives his daughter in marriage- Gāndhārī. We’re shown the prestige the Bhārata family name carries, when Subala’s reluctance to marry his daughter to a blind man is overcome by the prospect of uniting his blood with legendary Pūru-Bhārata blood. These are simple but reinforcing consistencies in the Indian historical narrative. The world of Subala and Dhṛtarāṣṭra is well aware of its history. They know of the Ṛgvedic era, of the glory days when Bhārata rulers expanded their kingdoms and brought civilisation to Bhāratavarṣa. Of the great dispersal of the defeated royals among Ānavas, Druhyus, Śivas, Pākthas, Pārthavas and more.

The seeds of discontent are sown in the passing of rule to Pāṇḍu, the younger son. In the next generation, the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, called Kauravas, contend that the rule should return to them- as the elder line. It does the Mahābhārata’s deep complexity injustice to paint a binary picture, but the broader narrative is of ambitious Kauravas desirous to inherit the entire kingdom, and accommodating Pāṇḍavas who appear content with their smaller inheritance centered at Indraprastha. It’s during this contentious period that Kṛṣṇa establishes contact with his cousins, and sympathises with their plight. The mainstream view of the war is as an internecine conflict between two lines of the Bhāratas, but this fails to explain why it pulled warriors from all corners of Bhāratavarṣa. The answer lies in tradition, which is frank when it calls the Mahābhārata a dharmayuddha, or a war for order and balance.

On the Pāṇḍava side we find Sivis, Bhojas, Cedis, Māgadhas, Pāñcālas, Matsyas, Pāṇḍyas, Colas, Vṛṣṇis, Kāśīs, Rākṣasas, Nāgas, Kekayas, Āndhras, Āndhakas and other Yādavas. On the Kaurava side were Prāgjyotiṣas, Madras, Māhiṣmatis, Sindhus, Kāmbojas, Avantis, Gāndhāras, Kaliṅgas, Trigartas, Aṅgas, Vāhlīkas, Pauṇḍras, Puliṇḍas, Drāviḍas, Kāñcīs and more. This listing paints a brush across the entire Indian subcontinent, and though we have the example of modern wars where all sides threw everything they had on singular coastlines, historians tend to dismiss the Mahābhārata’s claim that has several Indian clans sending warriors to a single battlefield in modern Haryana. The skepticism comes if we see the conflict as one emerging out of a vacuum, based solely on the rivalry between Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas. In reality, as with all great wars, there are all kinds of precedents for the final conflict. Clans from distant lands sent their warriors to Kurukṣetra not to settle a Kuru succession battle, but to help and participate in the final war for Bhāratavarṣa. We know that it happened at least once before, during the era of Sudās.

The presence of southern Indian contingents in the war should not be surprising, nor necessarily be dismissed as a later addition to the tale, for already in the later Ṛgveda we have evidence of Dravidian influence and southern Indian composers. Northern and southern India come into deep cultural contact by the end of the 3rd millennium BC, precipitated by the campaigns of Haihayas and then Rāma Dāśarathi. Along India’s eastern coastline, the Ānavas since Aṅga migrated south and established Kaliṅga, a powerful kingdom even in later India. A strong maritime presence gave it contact with the tip of peninsular India, furthering north-south contacts. Archaeological southern India emerges on the record in the 2nd millennium BC, through sites such as Brahmagiri, Morera Thatte, Sanganakallu, Adichanallur and Sembiyankandiyur. Of these, the latter three are Iron Age sites that display strong hints of native development of mining and metallurgy. There is also the tradition of Kuadam, an ancient site in Tamil Nadu that is drowned in ~1800 BC, and with it the seat of the third Tamil Sangam. Through the Veda, through pūjā and liṅgaṁ, through yoga, Rāma and Viṣṇu- all of Bhāratavarṣa is culturally unified by the mid-2nd millennium BC. This includes eastern India, with sites like Dihar, Chirand and Vikramkhol appearing as Iron Age cities in the same period. A site in West Bengal to this day carries the name Pandu Rajar Dhibi, its iron artefacts dated to the 2nd millennium BC.

Like the Rāmāyaṇa, the Mahābhārata has inspired countless retellings. And like the Rāmāyaṇa, it lends itself to multiple narratives and interpretations. Western civilisation, still churning movie after movie based on its two world wars, fails to understand Indian civilisation’s fascination with its own subcontinental war- even dismissing it as myth while its own Star Wars mythology finds consumers generation after generation. But why should Chitra Divakaruni’s The Palace of Illusions or Krishna Udayasankar’s The Aryavarta Chronicles be any less culturally relevant than a Nolan’s Dunkirk, or Oldman’s Darkest Hour? Beyond all political machinations, prior appeasements and even the foundations set by World War 1, World War 2 was Western civilisation’s classic battle of good vs. evil. This is explicitly clear when Hitler and his allies are called the Axis of Evil, and the ‘good’ side is simply known as the Allies. This is not unlike the Indian example, where the enemies are Asuras, Dāsas, Rākṣasas, Dānavas of all kinds, and the good people are always the Āryas.

The situation is less binary by 1900 BC, of course, when a variety of tribes in differing technological states inhabit the entire landmass of Bhāratavarṣa, from modern Afghanistan to Assam, Nagaland and Tamil Nadu. Kṛṣṇa and his five Pāṇḍava cousins set a journey of marital alliances across the land, which is one representation of the cultural unity amok in Bhāratavarṣa. From the Ṛgvedic era itself, southern ṛṣis such as Agastya have found northern veneration, and Vedic ritualism has found roots in peninsular India as much as the conception of Mahāviṣṇu and his avatāras has travelled north. This is the milieu when dharmayuddha occurs, the Indian civilisation’s own battle of Allies vs. the Axis of Evil. Of Pāṇḍavas vs. Kauravas, or Āryas vs. non-Āryas, or Ādityas vs. Daityas, or Devas vs. Asuras. The titles rarely matter, the lesson always does. How many wars ought a long civilisation to chronicle? How many need occur till either a lesson is learnt, or none survive to ponder over it? It took two world wars for Western civilisation to reach a United Nations, itself built atop the failure of the League of Nations. It takes millennia of civilisation and centuries of dynasty, generations of conquest and destruction, the breakdown of Rāma and Sudās’ proto-Bhāratavarṣa, for Indian civilisation to war for its self-definition. And this definition is provided by the great founder of Indian tradition, Veda Vyāsa. To understand the Great War, we need understand the mind and intent of its chronicler supreme.