---
title: indra and vrtra, god and dragon
sno: 29
---

Recall here the names of Aditi’s twelve sons- Aryamān, Dhātā, Tvaṣṭṛ, Pūṣāna, Vivasvān, Savitra, Mitra, Varuṇa, Aṃṣa, Bhaga, Viṣṇu and Śakra. We see that among the first Ādityas listed, Indra is not one of them. Paurāṇika tradition holds that Aditi had a total of thirty-three sons- the thirty-three Devas of Vedic literature. It also holds Indra as eldest among them though he’s never listed among the twelve Ādityas. A separate account takes Indra far back in antiquity, to Brahmā’s first elemental creations Dyaus and Prithvī, or Sky and Earth, or the Puruṣa and Prakṛti of later Hindu philosophy. Indra is born of their union, making him a product of the first union of the masculine and the feminine, of Dyaus and Prithvī. Incidentally this is why Dyaus is called Dyaus Pitṛ, or Zeus Pater, or Jupiter. This should tell us that Indra was never a real person, never the actual name of one of Aditi’s sons. Instead Indra was a title, a position occupied by different men throughout history.

The first Indra in this interpretation would have been Aditi’s eldest son, for Indra was initially a title for the leader of the Ādityas. Perhaps his name was indeed Indra and this explains the origin of the title. Or perhaps the title comes from the symbolic conception of a child of Sky and Earth, the original man, a Manu unto himself. This explains his status even in later Vedic times. The Indra of the Ṛgveda is not a historical figure that represents some kind of Aryan invasion. He is a multi-faceted concept that’s acquired at least three thousand years of mythologisation and philosophical exegesis by the time hymns of the Ṛgveda are composed. But to the Mesolithic and early Neolithic Indians, every leader of an Āditya tribe was an Indra, and the position could even be occupied by Daityas or Rudras, as it was by Bali and Skanda respectively.

Both of Diti’s sons have previously been wiped out by a manifest Mahāviṣṇu, and she engages in deep meditation to produce the son Bala, intended to defeat Viṣṇu. But behind Mahāviṣṇu’s mythic avatāras is the acting force- the martial front to all Daitya-Āditya wars- Indra. It’s a theme recurrent in the fractal maṇḍala, appearing even in the Mahābhārata as Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. In this timeline Indra preemptively kills Bala and eliminates the resurgent Daitya threat. Some Paurāṇika versions bring a different tale here- Indra first earns Diti’s confidence by tending to her during her pregnancy. Finding an opportune moment he enters her womb and tries to kill the embryo, in the process splitting it into seven pieces. These pieces collectively cry out for help and Indra appeals to them- Mā Ruda, or Don’t Cry! Thus they acquire the name Maruts, and in Vedic mythology they are the exuberance of military youth, ready to rush to the frontlines. They are recruited by Indra and eternally comprise his infantry.

Desirous of vengeance Diti plunges into meditation again, and some Paurāṇika versions bring Kaśyapa to her aid now. This might seem strange considering he was equally a patriarch to the Ādityas, but even in the Mahābhārata we see that clan elders are often forced to choose sides for various reasons. In this case it seems Kaśyapa’s allegiance is brought in to allude to a shift in balance. Āditya excesses were unchecked and a leader was needed to rally the Daityas once again. To Diti then is born Vṛtra with the sole intention of killing Indra. Another version tells us that the Āditya Tvaṣṭṛ was none too pleased with Indra’s domineering activities, and a hostility develops between them. This is deepened when Indra kills Tvaṣṭṛ’s son, and so the latter begets another to seek vengeance. This second son is named Vṛtra.

Composed at least three millennia after historical Vṛtra, the Ṛgveda imagines him as a dragon or serpent that holds the waters of the world captive before he’s killed by Indra- the Indian version of a God vs. Dragon motif found in many world mythologies. True to the Ṛgveda’s character the myth can be interpreted from several angles. A psychological interpretation reads Vṛtra as the dragon of Doubt that holds our mental forces captive- preventing us from action. Indra is the faculty of Discerning Leadership, the only thing that can vanquish doubt and unleash mentality, allowing it to reach its potential. When Vṛtra grows too powerful an Indra need be born in the mind, but when Indra leads us astray a Vṛtra is needed to bring mentality back under control. The first version is where Indra is born to defeat Vṛtra, the Asura son of Diti. The second version is where Vṛtra is born to defeat Indra, who’s given to abuse of power.

A naturalistic interpretation of the same myth places it at the end of the Younger Dryas, when global temperatures rise, ice sheets and glaciers melt and the enormous amount of frozen water held in the Pamir cap is finally released into the rivers of Asia. Vṛtra’s holding of the earth’s waters is the geological situation in the Younger Dryas and prior to the Holocene, and Indra’s victory over him represents the melting of waters and the figurative creation of the world. This interpretation is at odds with our dating of Svāyambhuva Manu. If we are to take the genealogies as broadly correct, Indra appears a few generations after Svāyambhuva. It’s possible, as we’ve speculated elsewhere, that Svāyambhuva dates to the pre-Holocene. Alternately, the end of the Younger Dryas was remembered in different ways by different peoples, and their mythologies later coalesced into a single strand of historical tradition such that anomalies were obviously built in. Whatever the scenario, we know that in a few thousand years after the kernel events, Indra and Vṛtra both were appropriated into a new cultural order. As we’ll see, Indra’s historical status as a military leader with eternally loyal forces (Maruts), and a proven track record of victories, would suit well the totems of a dynasty as expansionary as the Bhāratas. So enduring would the archetype be that Vyāsa would manifest it in Arjuna when composing the Mahābhārata. This is how the same truths are embedded into different layers of a fractal, such that they are discernible at any zoom level. The highest deity of the Ṛgveda, the opening motif of this geological epoch, is simultaneously the mentality inside you. Thus does a fractal become coherent.

A particular story indicates the close relations between early Daityas and Ādityas, reminding us of a similar equation between Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas. Indra and Virocana, Prahlāda’s son, are both under the tutelage of Prajāpati. They are told by Prajāpati that the Self is that “which is reflected in the water or a mirror.” Virocana dresses himself up in complete royal attire while Indra approaches a lake in common form. Seeing his magnificent reflection in the water Virocana equates the Self with his body, his physical appearance. Reflected in common form, Indra perceives the soul within and makes a deeper identification. Thus it is that Asuras are said to focus on the physical while Devas favour the spiritual. This may represent an early ideological division among Neolithic Indians, and shows the seed of later Indian philosophy. Certainly some early tribes would have been more materialistic than others while some turned inwards and abstained from material greed.

But we must not draw the division cleanly between Daityas and Ādityas. The Purāṇas paint a near neutral picture where Ādityas are often as deceptive and immoral as Daityas are exemplar and noble. With Vṛtra’s defeat the Daityas must turn to a new leader, taking us to the next generation of Deva-Asura wars. It also informs us of an expected nature of Mesolithic conquest- it would not last. News and armies both took an untenably long time to travel, add to it the existence only of pseudo-settlements or fortified establishments. Stable military conquest was still thousands of years away, and the victories of one generation rarely passed on to the next. This situation is well represented in the frequent reversals of fortune between Daityas and Ādityas.