---
title: introduction
sno: 3
---

In the beginning there was Brahmā, and he was all alone.

This would have been the end of it, but Brahmā found himself self-aware. He could gaze into the abyss, and when he did so he realised that his own reflection stared back at him. Modern cognitive sciences would tell us that consciousness is how information feels, when processed in increasingly complex ways. Well, Brahmā processed the information in increasingly complex ways- and so Brahmā was conscious.

Thus endowed, he embarked upon imagination. Except his was the manifest imagination- what he imagined he could create. So came the sun, the stars and the moons. The planets and nebulae, the infinity of expansion. It amused him for a while, but this was still inert creation. He could manifest it, sit back and beam with pride- but he could not engage with it. What he desired most was more mind, more mentality, more consciousness. He decided that this inert world must be filled with mind, and so he created his first progeny. The Sanat Kumāras, mind-born sons of Brahmā tasked with populating the world. But born of the mind, they were not given to matter. Defying their father’s wishes, they dedicated themselves to meditation, to pursuits of the mind. Brahmā’s desire was not to be, not yet.

So he gave it another shot, this time producing twelve mind-born sons- each a mānasaputra ṛṣi- Rudra, Marīcī, Atri, Aṅgira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Krātu, Bhṛgu, Vasiṣṭha, Dakṣa, Nārada and Kardama. Realising also that it would no longer do to stay within the mind, Brahmā externalised it- he produced speech. She was his first daughter, and she was named Vāc. But even now his desire was not to be, for the mānasaputras reminded him that they needed consorts, if they were to fulfil his wish to populate the world with more creatures of the mind. Undaunted, Brahmā created a son-daughter pair, Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā. That’s when he understood. It may all come from the One, from him, the Svāyambhu. But it needed variation, and the One first needed to be the Dual. Just like mind needed the matter, or vice versa. Like Puruṣa needed Prakṛtī. With Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā, Brahmā’s creation could finally begin.

Thus goes the Paurāṇika myth, the story of creation, or Sarga. But is it only myth?

__________

Ages come and go, the wheel of time is ever moving. Civilisations rise and fall, fading into mist or museums, or both. We’re told today that we can trace these movements. That we can narrate how civilisations came and went, speculate why they died, and pontificate how they must survive. This information is collectively called history, and special expertise and authority must be cultivated before one is considered qualified to speak on matters of history. But such academic rigour elides a profound truth- history is to civilisation as memory is to consciousness. And civilisation is to the collective as consciousness is to the individual. Just like consciousness is how the individual feels, when information inside is processed in increasingly complex ways, civilisation is how the collective feels, when information inside is processed in increasingly complex ways. It is a deeply personal phenomenon, a subjective felt-experience unique to the subject, and approachable only academically by the observer.

Every civilisation has a past age vs. the current age, and a specific critical path of world history has ensured that modern civilisation places this marker at the birth of Christ. We divide all of history into a Before Common Era (BC) and a Common Era (AD), or the age before Christ and the age now- the age of Christ. In this linear view of history, the past is always the age of myth, of gods and demons, of a time when humankind could not differentiate between truth and fiction, or natural and supernatural. The current age is the age of progress, of reality and history, of stories of personalities that we can take as truth. But this is so because what we have as “history” today is but the felt-experience of one specific civilisation- the West. The felt-experience, or history, or civilisational memory of other civilisations can be approached academically, but it is not to be given stature or platform. The felt-experience of every other civilisation is but mythology, the residual memory from a time when we were savages, primitive and supernaturalistic- or so it is said.

But the ancient Greeks looked to the Egyptians as an older civilisation, their own origins wrapped in myth and vague on history. The Egyptians saw the Greeks as young children, and considered themselves the descendants of a preceding, elder civilisation. The Egyptian histories of Atlantis were already semi-myth to the Greeks, and are fantasy to us of the Common Era. Even with antiquity, a linear view of history was not the paradigm of our Indian ancestors, who remembered not one but six ages past, each embedded deeper into mythology. Theirs was the cyclical view of history, containing a civilisational memory of the many rises and falls of humankind- the lessons learnt, not the dry description of events we call history today. By their own reckoning they were denizens of a seventh epoch, and their historical ages are now mythological to us. What is the modern Indian to do with these myths, which were but history to our ancestors? History dawns upon us with Alexander, almost as if we did not exist before the European mind first directed its gaze towards us. Everything from Buddha and Mahāvīra to the entire Vedic corpus was hastily bundled up within a few centuries preceding Alexander, for how could the history of one people go so far back in time before the Common Era? Clearly it had to be of a nature mythic, indeed even fictitious! Then the cities of the Indus Valley emerged from their mounds, and reluctantly we had to date Indian civilisation closer to that terminus date, the date of Creation for the Judeo-Christian mind- 4004 BC. But we dared not go further, and for a while Egypt, Sumer and Harappa were the earliest credits we would give to ancient humankind.

But that our linear history considers only the last few thousand years is our problem, and the true history of our species cares not for our hesitations. Stands tall the Sphinx with its water erosion, a nuisance to those reluctant to grant Egypt the antiquity it deserves. Rises high the temple of Gobekli Tepe, a snub to those who insist that megalithic humankind could not have dated to the 10th millennium BC. Uncanny lies the Richat Structure in Mauritania, its near perfect fit with Plato’s Atlantis dismissed as a curious coincidence. Confound all the astronomical references in Vedic literature, which force us to explain how someone was present to document timestamps in the sky even during the Palaeolithic era, and how they were transmitted across millennia such that they can be verified by computers today. We now know that before Mohenjodaro there was Mehrgarh, and before Harappa there was Bhirrana. Nine thousand years before the present, wetland rice was being cultivated near modern Gorakhpur and Prayagraj.

History is but the art of deciding what to consider and what not to consider in the narratives we build. We of the Common Era have decided not to consider ancient literature in our historical narratives, to place it not in the content of the current age but of the age past- of myth. What else explains the dismissal of what ancient Indians called itihāsa- this is how it was? Or the reduction to an ahistorical mess what they called purāṇa- stories of old? In fact we have the wisdom of hindsight. We can see in their literature the accretion of material, the deposition of culture, paradigm and interpretation over archaic kernels of truth and history. That we throw the baby out with the bath water only hinders our knowledge, it does not reduce the relevance of ancient histories. And we do this for our history alone. That Alexander was considered a son of Zeus does not come in our way, when we think of him as a real monarch. That Achilles too was blessed by Zeus prevents not the historian in searching for the real Troy. In his foreword to The Vedic Age, the formidable KM Munshi wrote:

“*To be a history in the true sense of the word, the work must be a story of the people inhabiting a country. It must be a record of their life from age to age presented through the life and achievements of men whose exploits become the beacon lights of tradition; ….; through efforts of the people to will themselves into organic unity. The central purpose of a history must, therefore, be to investigate and unfold the values which age after age have inspired the inhabitants of a country to develop their collective will and to express it through the manifold activities of their life. Such a history of India is still to be written.*”

Such is the mission of this book, in that it asserts that Indian history, from the advent of the Mesolithic to the Iron Age, no longer need be revealed to us by mute archaeology alone. Our tradition carries tales that show the Neolithic, hint at the Chalcolithic, and chronicle the Bronze and Iron Ages. Beginning with the first manvantara of Paurāṇika tradition, Indian history remembers seven ages, of which the seventh is the current. In them we see a transformation of the history of one age into mythology of the next, over and over such that the history of the seventh age is mythology to us. In this sense, India has already seen seven waves of the past-age-vs.-current-age paradigm, and we of the Common Era may well consider ourselves of an eighth age that has dismissed the histories of those past. Graham Hancock declares, not without reason, that ours is a species with amnesia. We’ve forgotten our own true history, and arguably nowhere is this truer than in a land such as India. In fact, given that India is one of the last extant pre-Abrahamic civilisations, forgetting the history of India may well mean forgetting that of ancient humanity itself.

What would be true Indian history then? What should it contain? What POV need it adopt? Munshiji put it best- a true history narrates the efforts of the people to will themselves into organic unity. The Indian organic unity, best described simply as dharma or Bhārata, is one we are taught to deny. Some readers may already be alerted to fears of Hindu nationalism or worse- fascism. So we may try to describe it through secular words, and in this book we use the notion of a fractal maṇḍala. Both words are generic enough to, at least temporarily, bypass our liberal filters. This book is so titled because a ‘Fractal Maṇḍala’ is a fair description for the Bhāratīya organic unity. It simultaneously conveys two essential characteristics of our civilisation. For one, it is a fractal- which is to say that our organic unity is embedded into each and every layer of our civilisation. It disturbs many if we call nṛtyaśātra Hinduism, or if we claim that saṅgīta is a part of dharma. In reality, the core world-views of the Indian organic unity are contained within every aspect of Indian life and society- including dance and song for example. This is why it is a fractal. No matter what level you zoom in or zoom out to, the same essential truths are echoed back to you. The organic unity is multi-level. *Yathā piṇḍe tathā brahmāṇḍe*, or as in the microcosm, so in the macrocosm.above, so below.

The second word in our description, maṇḍala, roots us to indigenous etymology. Saṃskṛtam dictionaries usually define this world as ‘round’ or ‘circular.’ But even “books” of the Ṛgveda are called maṇḍalas, so we must look deeper at the meaning. A maṇḍala is not only a descriptive word, but a philosophical one. It represents the same intuitions of life, death and reality that are found within the symbol of the Ouroboros serpent- a snake eating its own tail. It is a return to the source, an assertion both that the wheel keeps turning and that the beginning and end are the same. Maṇḍala 1 of the Ṛgveda has as many sūktas as does maṇḍala 10- 191 each- making the entire collection an Ouroboros serpent, or a maṇḍala unto itself. Understood a different way, a maṇḍala represents coherence- or the quality of being a unified whole. The Indian organic unity is not just multi-level, it is also coherent. This is why we are a Fractal Maṇḍala, and in our consequent examination of Indian history we will find this echoed again and again.

Our objective in this book is to map stories in Indian traditions to what we know about life and civilisation in the Indian subcontinent since at least the 10th millennium BC, and to prove that what is myth to the Common Era carries true history of the ages past. It seeks to establish that the Indus Valley Civilisation isn’t as silent as we’re led to believe, and that both it and its antecedents are well attested in literature. The Palaeolithic humans that progressed through Mesolithic to Neolithic in India were not mute. In their festivals they sang the ballads of their times, and over late night fires and sleepy bedsides they transmitted stories to their children. Stories that are still available to us in an unparalleled continuity of civilisation. And as these memories accreted they created an organic unity best described as dharma, but presented here as a fractal maṇḍala.

When our ancestors settled down and began to plough the fields, when wild species were domesticated, when they learnt the passage of seasons, the nuances to tame the earth and the technicalities to extract metal from rock- this too was recorded. As were the tribes, men and women instrumental to such changes. Innovators of one age became mythic to the next and godlike to the rest, but the transmission of stories continued and a continuity of civilisation was thus entrenched. As consciousness and memory are to the individual, civilisation and history are to humanity. The Indian consciousness and memory is available to us in the deeds of Indra, the might of Asuras, the many Manus and many Vasiṣṭhas, the Vāmana and the Varāha, the children of Kaśyapa and then of Ilā, the five sons of Yayāti, the transformation of Viśvāmitra, the nuisance of the Haihayas, the rise of the Bhāratas and Sāgaras, the abduction of Sitā and the vengeance of Rāma, the advent of Kurus and the great war of Mahābhārata, and more. As this list moves from the mythic to the plausibly historic, a spectrum reveals itself. But the spectrum is attributable to what we began with- the current age vs. the age past. The entire spectrum is history itself, shrouded in myth only to our Common Era eyes, but perceivable once the paradigm dissolves. Starting from Svāyambhuva Manu, the son of Brahmā, several millennia of Indian and often world history are available to us if we but approach our literature with the mindset of a skeptical historian, not a dismissive dogmatist. This articulates the mission of this book.

A note is merited here that we speak of Indian history, not of brahminic or savarṇa history. Caste as we know it did not exist in 5000 BC, for example, and there is a chasm of difference between jāti and varṇa. Humans have traditionally learnt the trade of their parents, and this leads to inevitable social stratifications. But the complex mess of modern jātis and caste taboos is a relatively recent phenomenon, and ancient Indians of the early millennia BC are equally the ancestors of us all. Casteism exists, and the least I can do is acknowledge it and cede space to those with felt-experience to speak on it, mindful of my own privilege. But it’s also true that narratives on Islamic glory need not apologise for Islam-inflicted trauma, nor do Christian evangelists apologise for how Christianity rips local cultures from their roots. Winston Churchill is both a World War hero and an Indian villain, and American founding history is celebrated even as slavery and racism are acknowledged ills. Babur and Chenghis Khan can be national heroes with their damning record, and despite what the British Crown did to India we allow modern Britain to find its monarchy cute and charming.

So we can celebrate the glorious in Indian history while working to correct ugly contemporary manifestations- the two need not be mutually exclusive. To create a prosperous future, we need not spit on the past. When I think of Indian history and of my ancestors, far back in time, I imagine wise introspects, creative metallurgists, pun-loving linguists, laborious farmers and courageous warriors alike. I imagine an entire civilisation with as much diversity as exists in India today, not a specific lineage, jāti or gotra. Bharata, Bhṛgu, Aditi, Viśvāmitra, Vasiṣṭha, Sudās, Rāma and more- these are Indian heroes, and as such we can all celebrate them. No other nation on this planet inherits such a rich civilisational history, and certainly none but Indians can claim lasting continuity. Our history has largely been written by outsiders viewing in, which need not be dogmatically dismissed. But it’s also past time that we reclaim our history and assert traditional narratives. We are uniquely poised to do so, for modern disciplines like archaeology, linguistics, genetics and astronomy only affirm what tradition has maintained all along. And the kernel of this tradition lies in what our ancestors considered stories of old- Purāṇas.

There once existed an original Purāṇa, compiled by Veda Vyāsa and transmitted to his disciple Romaharśaṇa/Lomaharśaṇa. He in turn taught it to his six disciples, and from the many branches consequent were later compiled the Purāṇas that we know today. Vyāsa’s original Purāṇa contained 4,000 verses, but the oldest Purāṇas already contain well over 10,000 verses. Traditionally, a Purāṇa need contain five primary features- an account of creation of the universe, an account of secondary creation within the universe, a genealogy of families and dynasties, an account of the various epochs of Manu and a retelling of major historical events.  But the reader of a skeptical disposition may well ask here- what historical authenticity does any of this have? At its core, Paurāṇika tradition contains the ballads of sūtas and māgadhas. Sūtas were those charged with recording the genealogies of devas, ṛṣis, kings and the traditions of other great people. A similar duty was assigned to māgadhas, who can be considered royal eulogists. As we’ll see, these sūta-māgadha traditions have deep antiquity in Indian civilisation. But laid out as is, they might appear no different to a crude, linear history. The Purāṇas, as expression of the Indian historic lens, are much more than a linear narration of who did what, when, how or why. This leads us to the great accusation levelled against Indian literature- that it had no historical sense. When looking for linear, clearly chronological and descriptive history, the accusation is in fact not untrue.

But it’s also only a case of one lens critiquing the other. Imagine if, in our modern narrative, the continent of America had been discovered a hundred times, by a hundred different people, over a long period spanning many millennia. Would we care to remember each year of (re)discovery, or the name of each discoverer? If we did, how many Christophers might we find? And when such a memory is preserved over a long period, how pressing do we think descriptive, linear narratives might be? At such a stage, civilisation would clearly realise that history needs a purpose, a lesson. It doesn’t matter what the geography of empires was, or who assassinated whom, when, to reach the throne, or even who wrote what text in what year, unless the memory informs the consciousness- or history informs the civilisation. Would everything that history ‘knows’ about Columbus or Cortés be relevant at all, if we behave no differently when, hypothetically, we encounter an extraterrestrial civilisation?

What matters in fact is the development of dharma- the organic, emergent, social and individual order. Historical record is important only if it offers commentary on dharma, a way for people in each era to realise civilisational truths and, ideally, avoid the mistakes of their ancestors. A unique and modern expression of this view of history appears in the TV show Battlestar Galactica. In its recurrent theme of “*all of this has happened before, all of this will happen again*,” the epochs-lasting Human-Cylon war, and the manifestation of many an avatāra, the show has arguably represented the moral and cyclical lens of history better than anything else on screen. It gives homage to the Indian roots of this in the opening soundtrack to each episode- a rendition of the Gāyatri Mantra.

This cyclical view explains the intractability of Indian historical record to the modern lens. For questions that are so pertinent to contemporary history- when did Bṛhaspati live, when did Daitya-Āditya wars occur, when did Rāma build his empire- Indian history appears not to have bothered with them at all. Instead, it gives extensive records of many a fantastical tale of Bṛhaspati(s), or props Rāma as an avatāra and gives him a tale that seeds narratives across the millennia, and even appears apathetic to the geological truths contained in its own myths. But reconciliation is not impossible, and it was attempted seminally by FE Pargiter in Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. His meticulous uncovering of descriptive history from Paurāṇika tradition allowed us a way to revise our assessment of the Indian historical lens. The question is not whether everything the Purāṇas say is fact- of course it isn’t. The question is whether they contain a historical element, which they certainly do. But even Pargiter stopped at the descriptive history, and we may allow him this since he was an outsider viewing-in. We need not be limited such. As children of the very civilisation we discuss here, we can indeed go deeper. These are not abstract, ancient humans we speak of but our own ancestors. We are uniquely poised to understand the civilisational felt-experience for what it is, to discern the fractal maṇḍala that our civilisation is.

To supplement the Paurāṇika sūta-māgadha core are the Vedic corpus, Jain histories, Buddhist histories and some later texts such as Kalhana’s Rājataraṁgiṇī. This thick-trunked, many-branched tree is a document of several millennia of Indian culture, society and history. But if Indian historical record is a dhārmika narrative with a cyclical view of the past, how can we trust the sūta-māgadha core? For one, Paurāṇika genealogies provide us a way to test them. Beyond the mythic eras we perceive with our Common Era eyes, the Purāṇas give us the genealogies of dynasties such as Nanda, Bārhadratha, Pradyota and Śiśunāga. These are attested historic dynasties, and the Purāṇas are largely correct in their name of kings and duration of reigns. If they are correct about the part of history we can verify, why should we assume fabrication begins right at the limit of our verification? Once again, this is not an argument to take the Purāṇas as literal truth in entirety. It only means we cannot dismiss them as complete myth.

Second, the timeline of human society, as it appears in the Purāṇas, is consistent with what’s told to us by archaeology and anthropology. The earliest Manus and their descendants worshipped Devī, the Mother Goddess, like early human societies are known to have, and matrilineality looms large in the early genealogies. Allusions to a shift to agriculture, to the first attempts to yoke the earth and husband the animal, all appear after the early matriarchal stage, and prior to the dynastic organisation of later ages. Even more, and crucial as an element of this text, the nature of tribes and dynasties as suggested in ancient India can now be mapped to archaeology, linguistics and ethnogenesis. The historical narrative of this book takes what is suggested by literature, and places it such that we can finally speculate plausibly on who led, peopled and populated the Indus Valley Civilisation, among other archaeological Indian cultures.

Another crucial piece of evidence we have, as accurate as a tape recording for reasons we’ll elaborate, is the Ṛgveda. As an artefact of language and culture it carries a far more preserved nature than all of Paurāṇika literature, and so distinct are they to each other that it engenders a critical debate in the historical analysis of Indian literature. On one end is the argument that the Ṛgveda alone is a historical timestamp, and all of later Vedic and Paurāṇika literature can be considered historical only as far as they’re confirmed by evidence from the Ṛgveda. In an extreme interpretation, the Purāṇas are nothing but a jumbled mess populated from sparse data in the Vedas. On the other side, the historicity of Paurāṇika literature stands independent to the Ṛgveda, the latter being a timestamp with a narrower window than is contained in the Purāṇas. There’s a way to parse this that allows us to reconcile that both sides say the same thing. For the window of time that the Ṛgveda applies to, its evidence is indeed supreme. Its preservation and transmission have been far more accurate, while the Purāṇas have been malleable given their larger cultural application.

But the Ṛgveda is of little evidence for the time before and after its broad horizon, and that’s where Paurāṇika tradition still has luscious morsels to share with the hungry explorer. Further, the Ṛgveda is a specific text of one tribe in time. It captures well this tribal milieu, and gives us clues on other tribes and people contemporary to the Pūru-Bhāratas, but it’s still only one dimension of India’s eternal multiculturalism. Even as ṛṣis composed Vedic hymns by the Sarasvatī’s banks, there were people living different lives along the Gaṅgā, Brahmaputra, Narmadā, Godāvarī and other rivers. Much that the Ṛgveda excludes, or is unaware of, is nevertheless captured in Paurāṇika tales. The contrast is that while the Ṛgveda has been assiduously maintained, it was never intended as a historical text, but while Paurāṇika literature has been subject to much accretion, at its core it was always historical and cultural.

Then there are the two Epics. The two grand tales of Indian itihāsa which, in their sheer tenacity to be sustained and transmitted over millennia, attest to their original felt experience- the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata. The Hindu religion’s stubbornness on insisting a divinity to Rāma and Kṛṣṇa seems to hinder Indian civilisation’s ability to establish their historicity. But true nuance lies in understanding that as the age current fades into an age past, it is history that transforms into divine myth. This is supplemented by a religious corpus of largely Buddhist and Jain nature, where the spiritual leaders of the latter often intersect with Paurāṇika genealogies. This vast literary field, to be truly tethered to history, need navigate through three broad milestones before the journey can begin. For one, we need the anthropological and archaeological backdrop of the era we talk about. This will be done in Chapter 2 titled ‘Sindhu Sarasvatī Civilisation.’ Second, we need chronologise literature such that it can be plausibly mapped to what archaeology reveals. When did the Mahābhārata happen, and can it be found in excavations of Indian soil? When did the Battle of Ten Kings occur, as chronicled in the Ṛgveda? And what impact of that can be found through other sources? This also needs synthesis with the Paurāṇika tradition of yugas and manvantaras, all of which will be commonly addressed in Chapter 3, titled ‘Chronology.’

But the biggest milestone to any honest narrative of Indian history, a cornerstone of distortion with cascading effects that manifest even presently, is the Aryan Invasion Theory (AIT, or Aryan Migration Theory in some versions). It reminds one of every Batman movie ever made, where the story cannot begin without a prologue on how Bruce Wayne’s parents died, and how he was set upon the path that made him Batman. Similarly, a story of Indian history cannot begin in earnest without recapitulating the many reasons why AIT/AMT is bogus, and why this is true even as we accept the linguistic truth of a proto-Indo-European language. This book is therefore structured thus: we begin with Chapter 1 on AIT and discuss it from multiple angles to establish its utter falsity. None of this is based on misplaced chauvinism or nationalism. We stick to facts and address counter-facts on their merit. Chapters 2 and 3 are dedicated to the Sindhu Sarasvatī Civilisation, and a chronologisation of Paurāṇika timelines with a view to real history. The book’s historical narrative begins in Chapter 4 and proceeds such:

1. Sarga (Primary Creation) – This details Paurāṇika accounts of creation, human origin and the first activities of Brahmā. We examine how early Indians understood their proto-history and what they wondered about it. Beginning with Brahmā and Svāyambhuva Manu, we explore the plausible situation in India between the 10th and 9th millennia BC. After exploring the origins of ṛṣis and Rudra, we end this chapter with an account of the definitive marker of Indian prehistory, the original flood myth.
2. Pratisarga (Secondary Creation) – In this we cover the early Neolithic period of India, from 9th to 7th millennia BC. This is the period where early tribes existed prior to their mythologisation- Daityas, Ādityas, Rākṣasas, Yakṣas and more. We cover the many wars between them and what that hints about history, and the great Indian ocean churning myth, or Samudra Manthana. We end with the dynasty of Priyavrata and an account of ancient world geography.
3. Manvantarāṇi (Eras of Humankind) – Beginning with the 7th millennium BC, this chapter documents the dawn of civilisation in ancient India. We talk here of Pṛthu Vainya, an uncanny prototype for the organising force that would have catalysed early civilisation of the kind evidenced at Mehrgarh, Bhirrana and other sites in the 7th to 4th millennia BC. We explore a vivid demonstration of how Paurāṇika historians contextualised the passage of time and waves of civilisation, with all its decay periods. At this chapter’s conclusion we arrive at true Indian history proper, the 7th and current manvantara.
4. Vaṁśānucarita (Genealogies of Manu) –All of Paurāṇika and Vedic tradition looks at the current manvantara as the present age, and stories of the epochs past were already mythic to these Indians. Commencing somewhere during the 4th millennium, this is the period that sees the rise of Indus Valley Civilisation, the composition of the Ṛgveda and later Vedic literature, and the periods of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa. This is the metallic age, when early experiments with copper yield an indigenously developed Bronze Age. When true evidence can be gleaned for contact between north and south India, and the emergence of a civilisational self-awareness that covers the Indian sub-continent.
5. The three following chapters are a subset of Vaṁśānucarita, structured so because both the Sāgara and Bhārata dynasties merit detailed discussions of their own. The Bhārata dynasty leads the rise of Indus Valley Civilisation, while the Sāgara dynasty presides over the rise of culture in Uttar Pradesh. They converge in a later era to form a unified Indian archaeology of the 2nd millennium BC, and the conclusion of this section brings us to the Mahābhārata war, which merits a chapter of its own.
6. The concluding chapter, titled after the book, will recapitulate our journey anew, this time with a view on what the Indian felt-experience means for civilisation today and going forward. Here we will examine some fundamental problems in the civilisational trajectory- which each civilisation has to deal with. A final section will be devoted to the idea of India today, a notion containing many voices. To all the valid what-ifs and buts that come to us when we think of Indian history, and relate it to what manifests in modern Indian society. To the question that what matters an antiquity and continuity to a nation so divided today? What matters to today’s Dalit that the ancient varṇas were not modern jātis? To the honour-killed girl that ours was once a society of gender equity? To even a student aspirant of a contemporary career, that ancient Indians possessed knowledge ahead of their times? This is where the art of history must justify itself. If our narrative has chosen a specific path to show something and ignore others, as all historical narratives do, we must establish a relevance to it. There must be a reason to look at Indian history the way we portray it here, and a benefit we can inherit to our modern woes societal and civilisational. This book will end with a due acknowledgment to such demands. Additionally, several maps and genealogies, referred to throughout the text, are given as appendix.

Finally, a definition must be given to words such as India and Hindu. In this book we use India in the sense of Greater India, a cultural concept of a sphere that once included modern Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Nepal, Tibet, Bhutan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka with parts of Iran, Tajikistan, Xinjiang and Myanmar on its periphery. Another word for this cultural concept is Hindu, but the modern mind is conditioned to distaste and controversy in equating India with Hindu. India was and still is often called Hindustan, so the nuance does exist to understand what Hindu means. For this book though we’ll reserve Hindu for when we mean the religion specifically, and for the cultural and geographical entity we use India, though either term means the same thing. Modern India is also Bhārata, and in tradition the terms Bhāratavarṣa and Āryavarta have been used among others. These unlikely ever included all of Greater India as we’ve defined it above, so we’ll use them sparingly and in context. These terms understood such, we commence now with an exposé of the great deceit of Indian history, the Aryan Invasion Theory. It must be impressed upon the reader that this theory is the single largest reason for a colonised Indian mind. Divisive concepts such as Aryan/Dravidian, Brahminic/Dalit, Invader/Ādivāsi- all stem from this. Because true Indian history cannot be perceived by a colonised mind, the decolonisation is important before we begin our account.