---
title: kashis and haihayas
sno: 50
---

The Purāṇas are ambiguous in their placement of the Kanyākubja and Kāśī dynasties. Some draw them from Bharata and his descendants, in which case they do not appear till after 3000 BC. Other Purāṇas take the earlier descent from Āyu, Nahuṣa and Yayāti. If we take the Ṛgvedic evidence as is, then a descent from Bharata appears the better fit. But parsing the Ṛgvedic evidence to detail (Chapter 6) actually confirms the earlier descent. Ṛgvedic evidence is taken primary also because it gives the desired impression of a west-to-east migration. It places the early Bhāratas along the Sarasvatī and their descendants along the Gaṅgā. But as we’ve seen by now, Bhārata predecessors originated on the Gaṅgā and migrated west. The number of early synchronisms that appear between Kaśīs, Kanyākubjas, Aikṣvākus, Haihayas and Bhārgavas make it overwhelmingly clear that the earlier descent for Kāśīs and Kanyākubjas is the correct interpretation. It helps to remember that, contrary to mainstream conclusions, the Purāṇas were not filled in using Vedic data. In fact a thriving sūta-māgadha tradition already existed by the time Vedic composers commenced their activities.

Established around the time of Nahuṣa, the Kāśī dynasty of kings is broken and limited, but it made important contributions to Vedic literature. Śunahotra, an early Kāśī king, had the sons Śala and Gṛtsamada. The latter is the composer of Ṛgvedic hymns, and he and his descendant Śunaka likely became Bhārgava ṛṣis. A few generations after Śala is born Dhanvantari, who taught the eight parts of Ayurveda to his disciples. While later Hindu tradition heavily mythologises Dhanvantari, in the genealogical lists there is only one by this name, and his placement in chronology is relatively certain. The area around Varanasi in 3100 BC is rich with agriculture, including an ancient practice of rice cultivation. Rituals, sacrifices and the entire sacred order revolve around the appreciation of seeds and grains, of herbs and plants, of beans, lentils and grasses apart from a variety of forest medicines. The polymaths of this culture develop extensive knowledge of how to use flora for human healing, and through Dhanvantari this matures into Ayurveda. The line after Dhanvantari comes into conflict with Haihaya expansions from the south-west, and Divodāsa I of Kāśī is defeated by Bhadraśreṇya of the Haihayas.

Yadu, the Yādava progenitor, had two sons. From Kroṣṭā the elder descended cakravartin Śaśabindu and then later tribes such as Vṛṣṇis, Cedis and more. In the line of Sahasrajīta the young son was born Haihaya. We know very little of Haihaya except that he anointed a Bhṛgu as his purohita and founded a dynasty in his own name. This likely commences a partnership between Haihaya rulers and Bhārgava ṛṣis descended from Cyavana. While the main Yādava line expanded south of the lower Yamunā, the Haihaya line pushed towards the Narmadā and Godāvarī. Conversely, if the Yādava people emerged from the south, then the Haihaya push into the Gangetic Plains marks a culmination of a journey started centuries ago from southern India.

Sometime following the end of Śaśabindu’s reign in 3700 BC, Haihayas began raiding the cultures of Yamunā and Gaṅgā. The Pūru power vacuum meant that they crossed Pratiṣṭhāna unchallenged, and Śāhanja Haihaya led the first raids into Kāśī, then under the rule of Ketumāna, Dhanvantari’s grandson. A few generations after him Māhiṣmān established a new Haihaya capital on the Narmadā river, and this became the base from where Haihayas wreaked havoc on northern India. In 3300 BC, Bhadraśreṇya Haihaya defeated Divodāsa I of Kāśī and the Haihayas make further inroads. The stage is set for a Haihaya attack on Ayodhyā, the ancient Aikṣvāku kingdom. Enter Arjuna Kārtavīrya.