---
title: krishna, or mahavishnu again
sno: 70
---

What do the avatāras of Mahāviṣṇu represent? To the unique Hindu mind, culturally endowed with the ability to seek synthesis between different ideas, the avatāras represent an ancient Indian intuition for the truth of evolution by natural selection. To the academic mind, the avatāras are a classical manifestation of good vs. evil motifs common to all religious thought. But the first avatāra was Varāha, and the aquatic Matsya came much later- a violation of the trajectory of evolution by natural selection. And in the conflict between Mahābali and Vāmana, who was good and who was cunning? In reality, avatāras represent a crucial artefact of ancient Indian history-telling. They are the compilation into myth, morality and sociological commentary the historical realities of a few events and personalities. The first avatāra, Varāha, was so geological a composite that many Paurāṇika retellings omit Hiraṇyākṣa from them altogether. Narasiṁha, the second avatāra, was a classic battle between piety and denialism. Matsya serves more as a historical marker than anything else, and Paraśurāma was the first instance of good vs. evil in the 7th manvantara.

For each of these, we are safer assuming that their ‘avatarification’ happened in hindsight, and each is the composite of multiple myths and histories. Rāma Dāśarathi was the first avatāra to be contained in a singular personality, yet his exploits in southern India too could be the composite of campaigns by many dynasties of Aikṣvāku kings. But all of this changes with the appearance of Kṛṣṇa Yādava, the first avatāra to be considered so in his own lifetime. A true historical personality, he influenced not only those he encountered, but also the history and trajectory of Bhāratavarṣa itself. Hinduism considers him the complete avatāra, a person divine in his own time, to his own contemporaries. In the Mahābhārata, he’s a pivotal figure in more ways than one, and within a few centuries of his life he’d become a primary deity of Hindu religious thought and iconography. It’s curious that we have no hesitation in considering Buddha or Mahāvīra historical personalities, or that they did experience a kind of enlightenment, even under a rationalistic lens. But Kṛṣṇa, who by all accounts appears as influential and awakened a being, we leave not for history but mythology. In many ways the myth of Kṛṣṇa and that of the Greek Herakles coincide, so we can visit the account of Megasthenes first:

“*They (Sourasenoi) further assert that Herakles also was born among them. They assign to him like Greeks, the clubs and the lion's skin. He far surpassed other men in personal strength and prowess, and cleared sea and land of evil beasts. Marrying many wives he begot many sons, but one daughter only. The sons having reached man's estate, he divided all India into equal portions for his children, whom he made kings in different parts of his dominion. He provided similarly for his daughter, whom he reared up and made a queen. He was the founder, also, of no small number of cities, the most renowned and greatest of which he called Palibothra. He built therein many sumptuous palaces, and settled within its walls a numerous population. The city he fortified with trenches of notable dimensions, which were filled with water introduced from the river. Herakles, accordingly, after his removal from among the men, obtained immortal honor; and his descendants, having reigned for many generations and signalised themselves by great achievements, neither made any expedition beyond the confines of India, nor sent out any colony abroad. At last however, after many years had gone, most of the cities adopted the democratic form of government, though some retained the kingly until the invasion of the country by Alexander*.”

Many a Greek and Indian myth coincide, which is to be expected given their common Indo-European origins. Given everything we’ve established about PIE and the PIE homeland, the roots of the earliest layers should be clear. But not every point of congruence is an Indo-European myth travelled west, for we must account for the Greek practice of describing foreign deities in the terms of their own pantheon. This is why they equated Śiva with Dionysus, even as their legend of the first Dionysus hailing from India carried the memory of Indo-European dispersal.

By 1900 BC, Bhāratavarṣa as we know it is a fully contained and self-aware civilisation. Jijith Nadumuri Ravi has undertaken the task of meticulously uncovering all the geographic data-points embedded in the Mahābhārata, the full import of which is visible on map in the Appendix. Contained within the Mahābhārata is civilisational consciousness of that which seems to threaten many- Akhaṇḍa Bhārata, or Greater India. From Gāndhāra and Kamboja in the north, or modern Afghanistan, to Pāṇḍya in the south and Lauhitya in the east, existed a vast civilisation with a unique and intricate web of marital, trade, cultural, ritual, religious and martial relationships. It just doesn’t appear a nation to those working within a modern, parochial definition. India’s past civilisational reality is the modern West’s aspired future.

The SSC moves into a late stage, with cities like Kalibangan, Mohenjodaro and Rakhigarhi being abandoned. This happens as the Sarasvatī dries and civilisation moves towards the Gangetic Plains. But the region between Narmadā and Yamunā experiences a population boom, peopled in large part by the many Yādava clans. Along the upper Yamunā, with their capital at Mathurā, are the Śūrasena Yādavas, who a few centuries ago had wrested the land from Aikṣvāku rulers. Descended from Andhaka, the son of Satvata Bhīma, they’re also called Āndhakas and Sātvatas, and their current ruler is named Ugrasena. To their north, with its capital at Hastināpura, the primary Kuru line is ruled by Dhṛtarāṣṭra. But the dangerous power that rises from the east is that of the Bārhadrathas of Magadha, ruled by Jarāsandha.

This is a period associated, at different places, with the OCP and PGW Cultures, as well as Black and Red Ware (BRW) and Ahar-Banas. Ancient Kāmpilya, or modern Kampil, yields OCP pottery dated to as early as 3322 BC, BRW from 3000 BC onwards, and PGW from 2200 BC. At Alamgirpur, PGW and Mature Harappan coexist around 2200 BC, and in Mathura PGW is visible from 2100 BC onwards. With more than 200 PGW sites in the Mathura district, it appears to be an important site not only for PGW but also for the OCP-copper hoard culture. In Paurāṇik terms, the area coincides with Śūrasena, Pāñcāla, Kuru and Matsya regions.

Archaeologically, 1900-1200 BC offers us a wide band where the Mahābhārata can plausibly be placed, though nothing in the tale indicates we should find archaeological evidence of war. The Great War near 1900 BC implies Cemetery H culture is the fallout, while having it occur near 1500 BC means we associate Cemetery H more with Sudās and his descendant Bhāratas. A great flowering of civilisation along the upper Sarasvatī-Yamunā rivers occurs by the end of the 2nd millennium BC, including sites like Indraprastha, Hastināpura, Ahikṣetra and Mathurā. Also crucial is the Dvārakā evidence, where an epilogue to the Mahābhārata deals with Kṛṣṇa and his eventual end. The legend tells us of a great drunken fratricide among the Yādavas post the war, and following Kṛṣṇa’s death Dvārakā is lost to the sea, and Arjuna resettles the Yādava survivors in Mathurā.

Archaeological Dvārakā has been dated to around 1500 BC, and its submergence to 1400 BC. Most late Harappan sites in Gujarat have a break around this period, while they flourish along the northern Yamunā and Sarasvatī in the latter half of the 2nd millennium BC. This evidence hints that the Mahābhārata occurred around 1500 BC, following which Dvārakā is destroyed and the Yādavas of Gujarat resettle- a fact confirmed both by the Epic and by archaeology. Also relevant in this period is the Gandhara Grave Culture which emerges in the Swat Valley near 1400 BC. It displays a new kind of burial tradition, and for a while was considered a marker of Indo-Aryan migrations into India. More recently though, material connections with the preceding Cemetery H Culture leads to conclusions of local continuity. The Indo-Aryan migration route theory also receives a blocker when BMAC genetic ancestry is not found in the Indian subcontinent.

Also of importance are the findings from Sinauli in 2018. Only 50 kms east of modern Kurukshetra, this village by the Yamunā has yielded a chariot burial dated to 1900 BC. The burial contains copper swords, helmets and shields, and three wooden chariots with copper triangles embedded in the wheels. Sinauli’s chariots and swords throw interesting questions on Indian chronology. Swords are unknown to the four Vedas, and the later Ṛgveda’s chariots have spoked wheels. But Sinauli’s chariot wheels are un-spoked, and the copper swords indicate a mature Chalcolithic weapons industry. We know that the predominant OCP at Sinauli has its roots in the Gangetic Plains, and to this day in modern Nepal survive the Tamatas and Tamrakars- ethnic Himalayan copper smiths. But the Sinauli cemetery has no evidence of horses, so to assume its chariots as full-blown war chariots is premature. What can be concluded from this kind of chariot in 1900 BC is that the technology was known to Indians from at least a few centuries prior, or 2100 BC. This is right around the time that Kuru-Bhāratas rise to power, and both among their genealogies and in the later Ṛgveda do we find names with –ratha suffixes the most. To explain a Daśaratha or Bhagīratha in the Aikṣvākus much earlier, we may have to await another few discoveries of early-OCP. But -ratha suffixes in Kuru names line up with archaeology.

Ṛgvedic dates must be reassessed as well. If the absence of iron in the Ṛgveda gives us a terminus date for its composition, the lack of swords compels us to consider a pre-1900 BC terminus. We also have reason to delink Ṛgvedic chariots from those found in the Steppe, though the issue of spoked wheels needs resolution. This is also true for horses, but we’ve discussed in Chapter 1 why there’s no reason to think of Ṛgvedic Āryas as horse-riding, charioteering war-mongers (in the issues of aśva and ratha). On swords, the work of Semenenko is crucial, who argues that the absence of them in the Ṛgveda excludes as the IE homeland all regions where swords were known and produced prior to 2000 BC (which he takes as terminus date for the Atharva Veda). An archaeological analysis of sword findings prior to 2200 BC then reveals that in Anatolia and the North-Western Caucasus, swords have been found since 3400 BC onwards. If the IE homeland was anywhere in these regions, swords ought to have been known to the Ṛgvedic people- but they are not. Since Ṛgvedic ancestors are located in India, Vedic literature must await the emergence of swords within the subcontinent, which happens after ~2000 BC.

Sinauli displays aspects both of Harappan ritual, like the orientation of burials, and OCP material culture, like the kind of pottery and metal objects. The archaeologist, Sanjay Manjul, advances the case to consider 2nd millennium BC OCP to be the culture associated with Mahābhārata. The latter half of this period shows association between various archaeological cultures- OCP, PGW, BRW and Ahar-Banas. BRW appears as a substrate of pottery type across modern UP, Rajasthan and parts of Madhya Pradesh in otherwise OCP and Ahar-Banas Cultures. This is associated with the Mahābhārata’s narrative of Jarāsandha and Magadha, which caused great movements of people to the west and links to archaeological origins of BRW in modern Bihar.

Near 1900 BC then, crossing the prostate cities of Kāśī and Kauśāmbi, Jarāsandha’s mighty army attacks Mathurā and is repelled by Ugrasena’s valorous son, Kaṁsa. The impressed Jarāsandha gives his two daughters in marriage to Kaṁsa, and the houses of Magadha and Mathurā are briefly united. An ambitious monarch and conqueror, Kaṁsa imprisons his own father and takes the throne of Mathurā. When tradition remembers him and his allies as Asuras, it means they were immoral rulers given to cruelty and plunder. Fearing a prophecy regarding his death at the hands of his nephew, Kaṁsa imprisons his sister Devakī and brother-in-law Vāsudeva, who is of the Vṛṣṇi clan of Yādavas.

The first six sons to this imperilled couple are born in prison, and each is mercilessly killed by Kaṁsa. A son is born to Vāsudeva’s second wife, Rohinī, and is named Balarāma (or Balabhadra). The next son, counted as the 8th and final, is exchanged in secret with the daughter of Nanda and Yaśodā, where both Balarāma and him are raised together. A figure of Indian legend and an avatāra of Mahāviṣṇu, he is named Kṛṣṇa. Throughout his early life, his maternal uncle Kaṁsa attempts to kill him, and the many tales of these attempts have parallels with Greek myths of the labours of Herakles. This is because the rivalry between Kṛṣṇa and Kaṁsa represents a generations’ long conflict, which comes to a final head with these personalities. And whether it was the Greeks writing of Herakles or Indians writing of Kṛṣṇa- each in their local context- they drew from common Indo-European motifs and archetypes.

The Mahābhārata alludes to widespread droughts and famines in the centuries leading up to the war. We’re told of terrible droughts, rivers shrinking, wells and springs drying up, agriculture being abandoned, shops being left unattended, domesticated animals disappearing, theft and robbery becoming rampant and even, possibly, cannibalism. This adds up with the drying of the Sarasvatī and the abandonment of many major SSC cities. Emerging between the decline of Pūru-Bharatas and the rise of Kūru-Bhāratas, the period experiences a lacuna in political organisation, and we know that continuity breaks down even among the Ānavas that remain in Bhāratavarṣa, since there are no genealogical records of them. This gap is exploited by the Āndhaka Yādavas, who unlike their Vṛṣṇi cousins take the martial, imperial path once adopted by Haihaya Yādavas. They yoke together a federation containing Cedi, Vidarbha, Avanti, Pundra and Kāruṣa among others, constantly attacking prosperous cities along the Yamunā, Gaṅgā and Narmadā rivers. It’s crucial to how history pans out that this happens alongside the drying of the Sarasvatī, explaining why the rising might of armoured, metal-driven armies turns its attention only to the Gangetic Plains.

The generations’ long troubles faced by people is contained in the stories of Kaṁsa’s attempts to kill his nephew, which number twelve. They include all sorts of Asuras, Dānavas and Rākṣasas being sent to kill Kṛṣṇa, each foiled by him and his brother in shrewd and miraculous ways. Historically this likely carries truth, for fratricide is already common among the Yādavas. These adventures take the brothers as far as Prāgjyotiṣa in modern Assam, and the Kalindī river in West Bengal. A glimpse is given to the Vṛṣṇi religion of the time, and its interaction with Ārya/Vedic ritualism, when the young Kṛṣṇa exhorts his kinsmen to eschew Vedic rites and instead worship their local mountains, groves and streams. Historians like to paint Buddhism as an anti-brāhmaṇa ideology, but they curiously ignore that various strands of Hinduism existed alongside the emergent Vedic ritualism of Kuru-Bhāratas. Though Kṛṣṇa seeks a synthesis later in his life, in the early period he’s given to local religions like much of India. His childhood paints a picture of love, affection and attachment to all elements of nature- cattle, animals, trees, groves, mountains, hillocks, rivers, lakes, streams and more- the traditio of old.

By his late teens, Kṛṣṇa finally confronts his pursuer and kills Kaṁsa, restoring Ugrasena to the throne. This marks the end of Kṛṣṇa’s childhood, and it may be noticed that only till the age of sixteen does he reside in Gokula, frolicking among gopīs as is the common image. There’s a tendency among Hindu denigration to portray Kṛṣṇa as a kind of irredeemable playboy, but an honest mind can easily calculate how true this could have been for a young boy not even sixteen years of age. And if it was, what should that tell us about adult gopīs who ought to have known better? This is an irrelevant debate in the larger scheme of things, but since even modern Indian comedians rely on Kṛṣṇa’s reputation to get a laugh out of their audience (or to virtue-signal), it merits introspection on what’s funny in impugned pedophilia and what’s incriminating- and for who. In any case, the Mahābhārata paints an unambiguous picture of Kṛṣṇa’s divine para-sexuality. He’s a personality in love with all and everything, which in turn inspires unparalleled love for him in all that encounter him.

A period of long instruction follows under the sage Sāndīpani, where Kṛṣṇa learns sixty-four sciences and the discipline of archery, or dhanurveda. He’s taken to modern Gujarat, to the cities of Prabhāsa and Dvārakā, where he is to witness the maritime prosperity of his Yādava cousins and the metropolitan diversity that characterises the land. Like Rāma’s journey links southern and northern India into a common consciousness, Kṛṣṇa’s life has already begun weaving eastern and western Bhārata onto the same map. The period under Sāndīpani and these travels to Gujarat fundamentally alter Kṛṣṇa, the playful boy of Gokula realising that he needs to grow up. He gains salvation, or enlightenment, at Badarīkāśrama, modern Badrinath, and returns to the world a changed man.

Among the Yādavas, especially the Sourasenoi or Śūrasenas of Megasthenes’ records, Kṛṣṇa and his brother are already figures of legend. From their exploits against Kaṁsa, and their services to Mathurā against Jarāsandha, to the restoration of a legendary gem to its rightful owner, there is much of their lives that sūtas have begun to record. This emerges in Mathuran archeology as Vāsudeva/Balarāma/Vṛṣṇi cults over the next many centuries. The brothers are pressed into service again when Mathurā can no longer withstand Jarāsandha’s relentless attacks from Magadha, and Kṛṣṇa relocates the Yādavas to Dvārakā, which becomes their new capital. Realising that he must take account of the political affairs of all of Bhāratavarṣa, he investigates the conditions of his cousins, the sons of Pāṇḍu in the line of Kuru. The Mahābhārata’s tale has already begun.