---
title: kurus
sno: 67
---

A few Kurus have already passed us by in history. In the Viṣṇu Purāna, the first Kuru was born in the line of Svāyambhuva Manu as Priyavrata’s grandson. Priyavrata’s descendants, as we know, migrated out of India and established the ancient regions of geography we’ve visited. Alternately, they represent the ancient geographies that Indians were familiar with, and added into tradition as descended from Svāyambhuva. Genetic data favours the former alternative, but we need not be overconfident in asserting it. The second Kuru was grand-father to Veṇa, and thus great-grandfather to Pṛthu Vainya. Paurāṇika tradition is several layers of myth, religion, morality, ritual and culture weaved into and around historical ballads. Every name in tradition is a historical-mythic composite, and the degree of mythology increases as we go further back in time. Even Arjuna of a later chronology wasn’t spared from mythologisation with Indra, but the way that ancient Indians remembered those of ages past was by weaving them into contemporarily meaningful ballads.

Conversion from history to myth happens, as this book introduces as a paradigm, when the people of one age look to those of the ages past. Names from the previous manvantaras are thus increasingly mythic, and even Pṛthu could be the quasi-historical memory of a Neolithic revolution- never a real person at all. Paurāṇika tradition is important not because it can deliver with certitude exact names and chronologies, it’s important because it captures significant macro-historical information from an astonishingly wide spectrum of time, and thus evidences an unparalleled continuity of culture. Long before modern macro-history could comment on the Faustian bargain humanity made when it transformed into an agrarian species, ancient Indians realised this and listed humans alongside domesticated animals.

Today, the language they used to record these things can be interpreted in a variety of ways, and anything remotely historical can be conveniently erased from record. This is why academic translations of RV 7-83 prefer “those thrusting forth with broad axes” instead of the contextually obvious “Pārthavas and Pārśavas” for pṛthupārśavo. Only modern academic disciplines can tell us true history, and everything the ancient people left behind is also best interpreted by said academicians. Thus should the history of evidently the longest surviving culture on the planet be examined, it’s insisted. Funnily enough, the entire field of Subaltern Studies, which has legitimate claims to representing history “from below,” prefers the historical narratives of Colonial classes and descendant academic disciplines over those of whom they colonised. The AIT/AMT/Single-Winter-Tribe-Interning-in-Punjab agenda becomes glaringly clear here.

A true examination of history “from below” will exalt Vedic and Paurāṇika evidence, and so it’s best we intellectualise that these too came to India from abroad! They came here and pushed the Dravidians further south, who also have origins outside India. As does Austroasiatic, which reached our eastern shores through the father-tongue model with elite Austric males. In other words- nothing in India is truly indigenous, and everything that came here dominated the preceding and erased it. This should make us okay with the later, recorded dominations, and it’s the true agenda behind even the vision of a single Afghan tribe transferring an Aryan kit to India. In this entire book we club all such visions under the term of AIT specifically to make clear this agenda, though critique of such work will highlight that modern “AIT” doyens never refer to the theory at all- which is true. Reputationism and deceptive intellectualism go hand in hand.

Paurāṇika geography tells us that Priyavrata’s son Agnīdhra inherited the realm of Jambūdvīpa, and he divided it further among his sons, most of whom lent their names to the kingdoms they inherited. One son was Kuru, who inherited the land called Uttarakuru. The uncertainty of ancient Paurāṇika history is that this could easily be the later addition of a Kuru into the genealogy, to connect Uttarakuru to Bhāratavarṣa and Jambūdvīpa in the account books. Uttarakuru might not contain a directional element at all. As Talageri suggests, it could simply be the best Saṃskṛtam expression of Tocharian self-appellation. A third Kuru comes to us as brother to Rantideva, but that’s all we hear of him.

The Kuru of our interest is the one born to Saṁvaraṇa, son of Ṛkṣa in the main Pūru-Bhārata line. The story begins with Saṁvaraṇa, who is attacked and subjugated by a Pāñcāla king, forcing him to give up the kingdom and dwell in exile by the Sindhu. This Pāñcāla king is clearly Sudās, and we know that Pūrus of scorned speech were among his enemies. These Pūrus are the people under Saṁvaraṇa, and the result of Sudās’ reign is their displacement and dethroning. The Sindhu here might not be the proper river but a generic term, referring instead to the Sarasvatī or Dṛṣadvatī’s northern reaches. It’s said that here the exiled Bhāratas resided in the forest for a thousand years, which only means that many generations passed before their resurgence. The rest of Saṁvaraṇa’s story, though compiled into a single name, contains what happens to his descendants during their period of exile. They’re eventually met with a Vāsiṣṭha, who they take on as a purohita. This Kuru-Vāsiṣṭha alliance, as we’ll see, has historic significance that manifests during the Mahābhārata era.

This above narrative can be connected to Ṛgvedic evidence, where we know that Sudās’ descendants moved away from Vāsiṣṭhas and adopted Gautama Āṅgirasas as their purohita. The Vāsiṣṭhas then might have tried to align with another royal Bhārata line, which in this case was Saṁvaraṇa’s. We are told that Saṁvaraṇa has a son, though it’s actually a descendant by a few generations, and he’s named Kuru. Powered by the Vāsiṣṭha purohitas, Kuru establishes a new kingdom with his capital at Kurukṣetra, which is created by clearing a field in the dense, vast forest called the Kuru Jāṅgala. The kingdom is nascent and scarcely a kingdom initially, and Kuru’s fame is as a patriarch more than a conqueror. His chronology is also uncertain, since we cannot really determine the number of generations between him and Saṁvaraṇa. It’s possible to start with a date of the Mahābharata and work backwards, and with 24 generations between Kuru and Arjuna we get a space of ~500 years between them. If the Mahābharata took place in 1500 BC, then Kuru emerged on the scene near 2000 BC. But if the Mahābharata occurred in 1900 BC, then Kuru emerges when the SSC is still in its mature phase.

Archaeological linkages are difficult to find. Kurukṣetra is associated with the Painted Grey Ware Culture, which dates from around 1500 BC onwards. Elaborate river-fortifications in PGW cities emerged only in the 1st millennium BC, so it’s likely that settlements preceding these would often be resettled owing to flooding. Cities like Hastināpura do show evidence of flooding in later eras, so the situation should not be uncommon in an era where the technology to build reliable river-docks did not exist. Even mature SSC cities are usually found not right at the river-bank but some distance away. In the dense Kuru Jāṅgala, to a nascent dynasty trying to revive itself, only small and possibly temporary settlements would be available.

SSC continues forward in its mature phase during this period, which is broken into three sub-periods named Harappa 3A, 3B and 3C. No significant discontinuity is noticed in this era. Kurukṣetra is not too far east of sites like Rakhigarhi and Bhirrana which are thriving at this time, so we must assume that Kuru Jāṅgala is significantly vast and dense for Kurukṣetra and the early Kurus to be removed from civilisation. This is to be expected if we add that Saṁvaraṇa’s defeat exiled him to the northern reaches of the Sarasvatī, near where it emerges from the mountains. By Kuru’s period the Kauravas have reached somewhat downstream, but they are still deep within forest, and isolated both from the Sarasvatī and the Gaṅgā. We cannot be sure where Hastināpura is placed in this scheme of things.

The accounts are varied on Kuru’s immediate progeny. The Mahābhārata lists four sons- Parīkṣit, Sudhanus, Jahnu and Niṣadhāśva. This is confirmed by the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, but Pargiter reconciled that Kuru’s main line continued through a son named Avikṣit, whose eldest son was Parīkṣit. The Kurus thrive and branch in the following generations, expanding along the Yamunā and Gaṅgā rivers to come in contact with Yādava tribes. As we approach the end of the 3rd millennium BC, we may give thought to transformations occurring in the Sarasvatī river. It’s likely stopped meeting the ocean, and the gradual desertification of the Gujarat area has commenced. This might explain why the Kuru expansion happens along the Yamunā-Gaṅgā systems, with a political pull exerted by the rising Yādava power.

Sudās’ North Pāñcāla line comes to an end quickly after Kuru’s era, and the South Pāñcālas come under sway of Kuru’s descendants. The lines of Kāśī, Kanyākubja and Vaiśālī no longer exist, and the Aikṣvāku decline is covered by the rise of the Eastern Ānavas. History remembers only one more cakravartin- Bṛhadratha of the Kuru line. But as we approach 2200 BC we must also turn attention to the great tribe peopling India for the past 1800 years, descended from the eldest son of Yayāti. While they emerge to true prominence only now, they’ve played no less a role in the creation of Bhāratavarṣa.