# linguistic

Index: 2.1
S. No: 5
Type: 📑 manuscript

Here we have The Oxford Introduction to PIE and the PIE World by JP Mallory and DQ Adams as a guiding light. In this eminently accessible text for the lay-reader, they examine the evidence of linguistics to explain how hypothetical PIE is reconstructed and what it implies about aspects of PIE people and their culture- physical landscape, flora and fauna, kinships and family structures, settlement/dwelling patterns, material culture, diet, religion, mythology and ultimate origins. We get an insight into the ever-changing nature of CL, indeed of PIE itself, through Schleicher’s Tale. August Schleicher, a founding father of CL, attempted to write a complete story in reconstructed PIE. Reconstructed PIE is a hypothetical language that CL builds from its understanding of present or historically attested languages. The first sentence of Schleicher’s Tale was:

avis, jasmin varnā na ā ast, dadarka akvams.

Which translated to- “*A sheep that had no wool saw horses*.”

In 1939 Hermann Hirt provided an updated version- owis, jesmin wblǝnā ne ēst, dedork’e ek’wons. This came after Hirt removed the “*clear sign of predominance of Saṃskṛtam in reconstruction*.” Of course, it’s not really explained why such signs should be removed unless there exists an a priori paradigm that Saṃskṛtam was not the original/close to the original. One should note that the first reconstruction predominantly uses the a vowel, but by the second reconstruction o, e and i gain primacy. This reflects the linguistic position that PIE used a number of vowels, which Saṃskṛtam later reduced to a single a sound. But we do have the real example of Romani, the IE language of gypsies which is known to have migrated out of India. Its predecessor possessed only the a vowel, while Romani possesses o, e and i as well. So we know that the change can happen in any direction. This can also be understood by anyone who has heard spoken Bengali, or by realising that our great Aurobindo is a rendition of ‘Arvind.’

An updated reconstruction was made in 1979 by Winfred Lehmann and L. Zgusta- owis, kwesyo wȴhnā ne ēst, eǩwons espeǩet. If this doesn’t appear arcane, the current reconstruction that was provided in 1997 by Douglas Adams should interest the reader- h2ówis, kwésyo wȴh2néh4ne (h1é) est, h1éǩwons spéǩet. Needless to say, we’re asked to accept every step as hard science. There is some merit to it. The predictive power of CL was tested in a reconstruction of Latin from Romance languages- to test whether the reconstruction would be similar to actual Latin, which is well attested. It was, and linguists have been emboldened ever since to lead us to the truth through their science alone. But it’s interesting that of all the nations and civilisations in the world, India is the only country where our history is told to us by linguists, who incidentally developed their field through analysis of one of our own languages. IE languages dispersed across Eurasia, but this hasn’t made some Germans more indigenous than others, or some Englishmen adivāsi over the rest. The histories and population divides of these countries are formed through a composite of several disciplines, but in India linguistic theories decide real divisions. Let’s accept for now that linguists can indeed reconstruct entirely hypothetical languages of the past. Doing so allows us to examine the conclusions made by Mallory-Adams about the original PIE homeland, its climate, flora, fauna and other conditions.

On the physical landscape of PIE, the authors conclude that “*The picture provided by the reconstructed lexicon is not very informative concerning the physical environment of the speakers of the ancestral language, although there have been scholars enough who have tried to press the slender evidence into revealing the precise location (or type of location) inhabited by the Proto-Indo-Europeans*.”

AIT theories should be on shaky ground given the above conclusion alone. When a detailed, often arcane, reconstruction of PIE yields nothing conclusive about the precise location of the PIE people, how are we to already conclude the invasion/migration of an Aryan tribe in India after 2000 BC? Interestingly, a great deal of reputationist effort has gone to linguistically proving that the PIE homeland cannot have been in India. Much salience is given to the field of linguistic palaeontology, which reconstructs environment, flora and fauna to imagine the PIE world. For example, Mallory-Adams conclude that PIE did not originally have a word for sea, and that an existing word for an inland lake was instead projected to the ocean. This implies that the PIE homeland was not near the coast but in a landlocked area. Such a conclusion excludes India from consideration, for Indians based whether in the peninsula or along Sarasvatī, Sindhu and Gaṅgā knew where these rivers met the ocean. Simultaneously, it affirms any theory that places the PIE homeland around the Caspian Sea or the Pontic Steppe.

The PIE word in question here is *mori, and the question is whether it was originally a word for an ‘inland lake’ that got transferred to the ‘sea’, or the other way around. The asterisk before a word indicates that it’s reconstructed in a hypothetical language. It’s not a real word per se, but an approximation of what the word might have been in the hypothesised language. Mallory-Adams use the example of English, which is a maritime language, where the equivalent words moor and marsh refer to an inland body of water, and not the sea. This evidences to them that *mori was originally used similarly, and that there was no PIE word equivalent for the sea. But Shrikant Talageri points out that there is a PIE antecedent for sea in the Proto-Germanic *saiwa. Modern German uses see for lake and meer for sea, while Dutch uses meer for lake and zee for sea. Clearly, using the singular evidence of English to make a larger conclusion on PIE itself is untenable, yet Mallory-Adams do not stop there.

They conclude that words for sea in other IE languages such as Greek or Indo-Aryan must have been borrowed from non-IE sources. This renders the word samudra, though patently Indo-Aryan, a loanword from a non-Indo-Aryan language in their reckoning. But Talageri again points to the word mīra (pronounced similar to German meer) in Pāṇini’s Uṇādi Sūtras, which Pāṇini translates as samudra. By Pāṇini’s own admission, mīra is a word his rules cannot derive, implying that it’s more archaic than the Saṃskṛtam lexicon of his time. Since mīra here means the sea, its antiquity suggests that this was the original meaning of the PIE *mori, and invalidates Mallory-Adams’ conclusion that the PIE homeland was a landlocked region which only knew inland lakes. Samudra comes from sam + udram, where sam means together with or altogether and udra means waters. Between an ocean and a lake, it’s the former where all the waters truly come together. The ‘sea-argument’ thus does nothing to refute an OIT model, nor does it offer anything to prove an AIT one. This means that all geographical information from reconstructed PIE tells us nothing about the homeland, nor excludes India from consideration.

On the PIE climate, Mallory-Adams again concede that “*(the reconstructed words) attest a basic range of atmospheric phenomena but nothing decisively as to where precisely the proto-Indo-Europeans lived*.” But they point that words such as *ćaka (thin ice), *ćäke (hard snow), *kum3 (thin snow) and *kura (fine snow) indicate a cold environment. Here again AIT is not necessarily vindicated. From the Himālaya to the Pamir Mountains and the many ranges that snake out from this roof of the world, snow in all forms was familiar to the ancient Indians. We need not posit an invasion from Pontic Steppe or Siberia to explain these reconstructed words in the PIE lexicon. The current leading AIT doyen (though he calls it not an invasion), Michael Witzel, insists that the PIE homeland was situated in a temperate climate. He uses this to dismiss any out-of-India scenario because, as we all know, India is a tropical country. Apart from Witzel’s reliance on a “*cold*” place familiar with “*wolves and snow*,” we do not really know what he means by a temperate climate. But here is a map of temperate locations in the world according to the Koppen climate classification, the most widely used climate classification system in the world:

[https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/Mk_2LXK7sZcC7LhfYpxat0mUo0lpScf1xFx4Cl9Vshc6OAM1ALiQH_c4uJi1XVUrNQKNsR-i4OsIUlNGtqNhSP-GVSQvnuJTnjXJJwwHVg16t7X_tfAanSWVijV3v4Gz2Ym3Wnjn](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/Mk_2LXK7sZcC7LhfYpxat0mUo0lpScf1xFx4Cl9Vshc6OAM1ALiQH_c4uJi1XVUrNQKNsR-i4OsIUlNGtqNhSP-GVSQvnuJTnjXJJwwHVg16t7X_tfAanSWVijV3v4Gz2Ym3Wnjn)

The map above shows locations of the world with degrees of temperate climate. It’s only for the recent decades, and the climate situation in 2000 BC or earlier could have been very different. But this map is a helpful indicator that no classification of the PIE homeland as a temperate/cold place necessarily eliminates India from consideration. In any case, when we say ‘India’ here we mean a very large geography that includes the Tibetan Plateau as well as the Pamir Mountains. The eastern Himālaya are already speculated to be the homeland of two other language groups, Tibeto-Burman and Austroasiatic (the latter is not conclusive, and its homeland could be anywhere between the eastern Himālaya and Southeast Asia). The modern Indian states of UP, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, along with the regions of Tibet and Xinjiang, have long been a global thoroughfare, with all kinds of peoples, languages and cultures both originating and travelling through here. No conclusions on the PIE climate necessarily exclude the Tibet/Terai/north Gangetic Plains from consideration. Notice also in the above map that neither the Pontic Steppe nor Anatolia proper are classified temperate.

From the reconstructed lexicon of PIE flora and fauna, Mallory-Adams conclude that the PIE people “*possessed a Neolithic economy with extensive references to domestic livestock (cattle, sheep, goat, pig; possibly horse)*.” Note how different this image is to that of nomadic chariot-warriors raiding urban settlements with horse cavalries, and also that the above description might as well be talking about early Jhusi, Lahuradewa or Bhirrana-like cultures. Witzel argues that words such as wolf and snow are necessarily the linguistic memories of a colder climate and prove the AIT, though it’s left unanswered why Indians familiar to the Himalayan ranges or Greater Tibet would not have possessed native experience of vṛka and hema. In fact, as we will later see, the Indian tradition remembers not just ice per se but a wide-ranging permafrost- the Hema Gaṅgā. Talageri uses evidence of reconstructed PIE words for the tiger, lion, leopard, monkey, elephant and horse to firmly establish an OIT model as the only viable scenario.

Mallory-Adams caution against using negative evidence, that is, the absence of evidence as the evidence of absence. But if we are to, as is done in the wolf and snow argument, then it should be noticed that you will not find elephants and monkeys in the Steppe, nor tigers and wolves in Anatolia. But you will find them all in India. Similarly, the reconstruction of a typical PIE settlement as that made of timber, wattle and daub and wholly prior to the use of bricks has been used as an argument in favour of AIT. The Indus Valley Civilisation widely used baked bricks, or iṣtakās- a word not found in the Ṛgveda. Taking this to be a confirmation of AIT is a result of confusing the chronology and timeline of the Ṛgveda. Ever since Max Muller, the Ṛgveda is dated to around 1200 BC, leading to the narrative of Aryans arriving in India by 1500 BC, bringing Saṃskṛtam and Vedic culture. The lower limit here is set by iron, or its absence in the Ṛgveda, indicating it preceded the Iron Age. The upper limit comes from the lack of baked-bricks. Both the upper and lower limits for the date of the Ṛgveda are set by taking absence of evidence as evidence of absence. Incidentally, using this principle also indicates that the Ṛgvedic people knew ghee but not milk (since the Ṛgveda is familiar with the former but does not refer to the latter). Such is the flimsy and frankly shoddy intellectual ground that AIT theories rest on. Further, as we will see in the next chapter, wattle-and-daub structures relying on timber were the primary settlement mode in the Gangetic Plains from at least 7000 BC. Once again- none of this necessarily excludes them from consideration as the PIE homeland (where the homeland extends north to Tibet).

A reconstruction of PIE words for basic kinship ties deserves special attention. Not only because it shows clearly the relationship between IE family branches, but also because it demonstrates a linguistic principle that confirms the OIT model. Consider the following table (rendered without IAST):

| English | Latin | Greek | Dutch | Sanskrit |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Mother | Mater | Meter | Moeder | Matr |
| Father | Pater | Pater | Vader | Pitr |
| Brother | Frater | Phreter | Broer | Bhratr |
| Sister | Soror | Eor | Zuster | Svasr |
| Son | Filius | Huius | Zoon | Sunu |
| Daughter | Filia | Thugater | Dochter | Duhitr |

The similarities between mother, father, brother and sister are clear in the above languages, even on basic sight and sound. But what of son and daughter, where for Saṃskṛtam modern Indo-Aryan speakers would instead wager putra and putrī? The apparent connections between IE languages are not just phonetic or visual. They’re based on a deeper connection in shared root sounds or syllables. Since words can often be borrowed between languages, mere phonetic similarity doesn’t suffice to establish a connection. On this account, the connection between an English son and a Dutch zoon would not have been apparent without the discovery of the Saṃskṛtam sūnu.

Stemming from the root sū, which meant to birth or beget, sūnu meant one who birthed- pushed the family line forward- and also one who sowed or begat seed in the earth. Once the Saṃskṛtam sūnu was discovered, a reconstructed PIE word could be established and connections mapped to other IE languages. The roots of daughter too are evident only from an investigation of Saṃskṛtam, where it stems from the root duha, which meant to milk, and indicates that the daughter’s role was to milk the cow in the PIE household (incidentally, this confirms that the early PIE state was Neolithic, with animal husbandry and proto-agriculture). Alternately, duha meant to milk in the sense of a daughter that was of child-bearing age. Both sūnu and duhitṛ are thus built atop biological and vocational roles of the PIE son and daughter. The linguistic principle at play here is what Nicholas Kazanas referred to as the Preservation Principle (PP). Before we define it, let us look at another table, this time of the comparative theonyms (names of gods) in some IE languages:

| Saṃskṛtam | Greek | Latin | Baltic | Celtic | Mitanni | Lithuanian |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Agni |  | Ignis |  |  |  | Ugnis |
| Aryamana | Ares |  |  | Ariomanus |  |  |
| Ashvin | Hippos | Equus | Esva | Epona |  |  |
| Bhaga | Phoibos |  |  |  | Bugas |  |
| Dyaus | Zeus | Jupiter |  |  |  | Dievas |
| Indra | Andr- |  |  | Andrasta | Indara |  |
| Marut-as |  | Mars |  |  | Maruttas |  |
| Apam Napat | Anepsios | Neptune |  | Nech-tan |  | Nep |
| Parjanya |  |  | Perkunas |  |  |  |
| Ribhu | Orpheus |  |  |  |  | Orbu |
| Surya | Helios | Sol | Saule |  | Surias |  |
| Usha | Eos | Aurora |  |  |  | Ausra |
| Varuna | Ouranos |  | Velinas |  | Uruwna | Urina |
| Yama | Zemia | Gemini |  |  |  |  |

The above list only considers languages that have retained a considerable set of IE theonyms, but each theonym listed is certain to be IE. We know this because each theonym is present in at least three different families- a situation that could not arise if it were independently developed. In the case of Parjanya, we have the additional evidence of Perkunu from the Slavonic family. Saṃskṛtam is presented in the first column to make clear its all-inclusiveness. Of all the IE language families, it has preserved the largest set of theonyms. Further, no two non-Saṃskṛtam families have preserved a theonym that is not also present in Saṃskṛtam. Now have a look at the earliest that the IE language families have been attested in history:

| Language Group | Earliest Attested Period |
| --- | --- |
| Anatolian | 2000-1500 BC |
| Indo-Aryan | 1500-1000 BC |
| Iranian, Celtic, Italic, Greek | 1000-500 BC |
| Germanic | 1-500 AD |
| Slavic | 500-1000 AD |
| Baltic | 1500-2000 AD |

The current theory has the PIE people originate in the Pontic Steppe in 3000 BC, spread to Europe over the next thousand years, and begin their journey to India in 2000 BC- where five centuries later they compose the Ṛgveda. Is it not strange that the IE languages of the original homeland (Balto-Slavic) are attested the latest, only five hundred years ago? And if the PIE people were migrating to Europe between 3000 and 2000 BC, why is it that the first attestations there are found only after 1000 BC? The intellectual deceit here should be obvious. How is it that in the place where the PIE people went first- Europe- the languages are attested much later and only a few IE theonyms present, while in the place where the PIE people went later- India- the language is attested much earlier and that too with the full theonym set? Only in India in fact do the PIE people arrive just in time to compose the largest attested corpus in any IE language- the Vedic- whereas anywhere else they did no such thing!

This is where we should bring the Preservation Principle, which Nicholas Kazanas defines such- the people or culture that has preserved the most has moved least. In his words, “*It is a well known fact of history that people on the move for a long period tend to lose elements of their culture while their language suffers changes, as they meet with other cultures and/or have little leisure to pass their lore to the new generations*.” Both in the case of sūnu/duhitṛ and of the IE theonyms, Saṃskṛtam scores highest on the Preservation Principle, indicating that it has moved the least. This brings the PIE homeland to northern India, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Kazanas supplements this with observing PP even in the sphere of poetics. “*There is hardly a major poetic device in the various IE branches that is not also present in the Ṛgveda*.” This is further supported in examination of common mythological motifs, where Nick Allen has shown that Indian traditions have retained both gross and subtle layers, while others only the gross. The principle extends to Saṃskṛtam as a whole, and Kazanas quotes another linguist, Burrow:

“*Vedic is a language which in most respects is more archaic and less altered from original Indo-European than any other member of the family*.”

The above comes from a linguistically rigorous analysis of roots, stems and etymologies, examples from which have been discussed above. Here too the principle is evident, and while we can never linguistically prove or disprove a specific homeland, it becomes clear that this homeland was closer to northern India than it was to any other purported homeland. Mainstream linguists reject this principle. To them these aspects of Saṃskṛtam at best evidence its archaic nature, that it’s eldest among the IE sister languages. Kazanas goes a step further, and argues that the archaic nature has been preserved because Saṃskṛtam has moved the least from the PIE homeland.

We can understand this better by trying to apply the principle to a different homeland, say the Pontic Steppe. The IE languages native in this geographical area are Baltic and Slavic. If we posit the Steppe as the PIE homeland, we have to explain why the Slavic languages lost Indra, Agni, Varuṇa and Yama, while the people who eventually reached northern India managed to retain the full set despite their generations-long, arduous journey. This is supplemented with the evidence of Finno-Ugric, a language family containing Finnish, Hungarian, Estonian and others. Finno-Ugric has a number of loanwords from PIE, but PIE has no loanwords from Finno-Ugric. This can happen only when a section of PIE speakers live near Finno-Ugric speakers, but so far away from the original PIE homeland that no words are transmitted back. Placing PIE in the Pontic Steppe does not fulfil this condition. Placing it in India does (so does placing it in Anatolia, but Anatolia as the PIE homeland is untenable for other reasons).

Mallory-Adams criticise the Preservation Principle on grounds that Slavic has suffered many ravages over the years, including the ravage of Christianity. It’s unfair to compare a language as preserved as Saṃskṛtam to Slavic in this view. Some might argue that languages could have existed before their first appearance in attested history- an argument that actually makes the case to antiquate Saṃskṛtam more than we do! Though Saṃskṛtam underwent ravages for a much longer period, and though later words such as samudra or putra came into vogue, the memory of mīra and sūnu wasn’t lost. Such a memory, Kazanas reminds us, is lost only when a people are on the move for a long period. This implies that Saṃskṛtam was able to retain a link to archaic PIE roots that other languages lost. Linguists insist that the answers to PIE-questions will come from linguistics alone, yet Mallory-Adams’ tome is unable to posit either a concrete PIE homeland nor establish any AIT scenario. Using the same conclusions as them however, and supplemented with a rigorous analysis of the Ṛgveda a la Talageri or the Preservation Principle a la Kazanas, we’re able to articulate a linguistically valid OIT model.

A linguistic argument used against OIT is the presence of Dravidian language loanwords in Saṃskṛtam, which are not present in IE languages outside India. This is used to posit that PIE originated elsewhere, and only Saṃskṛtam came into contact with Dravidian. But Talageri has shown that Dravidian influences into Saṃskṛtam are evident only in the later layers of the Ṛgveda, and are absent at early layers. The PIE split, though not a single event in history, occurred prior to the emergence of Dravidian influences. This means that other IE languages had already dispersed out of India by the time Saṃskṛtam and Dravidian came into cultural contact. Add to this recent work by Tonoyan-Belyayev, which not only asserts that Dravidian influences in Indo-Aryan are an adstratum (co-existent) and not a substratum (influx of one over another), but also that there are Dravidian influences to be found in other IE language families. As is the case with all compelling AIT arguments, they’re well resolved even in an OIT scenario. Further, PIE theory is only that of descent. It looks at the IE language families and posits a common ancestor. It makes no comment on what happens to these families after descent. Saṃskṛtam, as we have agreed, is not PIE itself. It’s a daughter language, and nothing prevents it from taking on influences from other languages after its birth, while its sisters moved out of the Indian homeland.

Another example of reputationist deceit appears in the above case. Finno-Ugric languages have PIE loanwords, but PIE does not have Finno-Ugric loanwords, yet this does not stop reputationists from positing the Steppe as the homeland. If this were true, then PIE should have Finno-Ugric loanwords, but the argument is used in the Dravidian case to exclude an Indian homeland. We’ll see in later sections that if PIE originated in/near/north of the Gangetic Plains, its split into daughter languages likely happened prior to its encounter with Dravidian languages.

In any case, this confusion on loanwords and non-IE influences rests fundamentally on a chronology of PIE. Most linguists favour a period between the 4th-3rd millennia BC for the split of PIE, but they express valid caution in being certain about when it originated or when exactly it split. But there are also theories of PIE origin that date it between the 9th-7th millennia BC. In truth, while CL can define the internal chronology of languages, it’s not equipped to define absolute chronologies- which can only come through supplementary evidence from fields like archaeology. Further, the split was not a single event that created all IE groups instantly. Some insist that Anatolian is not a daughter of PIE but a sister, meaning that both PIE and Anatolian descend equally from a proto-Anatolian-PIE. Add to this the Nostratic hypothesis which speculates to the original Tower of Babel, the hypothetical proto-language from which descended all the major language families of humanity. New questions emerge instantly- who were the Nostratic people? Where was the homeland? What was their material culture like? When did Nostratic split into proto-Anatolian-PIE?

Looked this way, the issue of language family origins and dispersals begins to look as contentious as that of hominid family origins and dispersals. The date of origin for our own species is consistently pushed back by newer findings. There is evidence that the Neanderthals too might have possessed language, and increasingly it looks like our family tree mated with theirs. Every new hominid fossil triggers a debate on whether it belongs to an ancestor species or to a sibling species. No neat chronology can be established from the common ancestor we share with chimpanzees, running through the many hominid species down to us, such that we know exactly when each species arose and was replaced by another (nor was the journey necessarily discrete). Neither are we clear on whether species that once diverged always remained so or whether they re-intertwined. The landscape is ever changing and increasingly complex, and if the linguistic family tree is indeed correlated to the genetic one then it’s bound to be equally uncertain. Pointing these facts out is not a denialism of evolution by natural selection, and thus it’s equally not a denial of the entire field of Comparative Linguistics. But reputationists like to portray that critique of their work is akin to dismissal of CL itself. Such broad straw-men are easier to hide behind, after all.

More to the point, the AIT that we deal with in India is scarcely a linguistic theory alone. It has over the decades acquired ethnic, racial, cultural, genetic and archaeological layers, such that in its latest avatar the influx of particular type of DNA is taken as proof that all of Vedic culture, literature and language are a foreign import. PIE originated in one part of the world and spread across Eurasia, but only in India do we find books with the title ‘Which of Us are Aryans.’ The problem is that language does not map congruently to ethnicity, race, culture or genetics. For example, the introduction of a new kind of pottery-ware in the archaeological record does not necessarily mean the arrival of a new language, and the converse is equally true. In India today, even within localised regions, we find several different languages, dialects and ethnicities coexisting in various degrees of overlap. In imagining PIE we must ask- would it have existed in isolation? Would it not have had other languages in its neighbourhood? If it did, then the PIE homeland is likely to be a region rich in other language families. This means it could be a geographical sphere rich in all sorts of cultures and ethnicities. We are thus brought closer to the eastern Himālaya, Gangetic Plains, Tibetan Plateau and Xinjiang- the prehistoric thoroughfare of humanity.

A curious implication emerges from the correlation between languages and genetics. In the latter field, an area with the largest genetic diversity is considered the origin point for that genetic trait. In a very broad application, that Africa contains the maximum variety of great apes- humans, gorillas, chimps and bonobos- attests that it’s the origin of the great ape genus. This conclusion is based on the observation that the longer a trait survives in a region, the likelier it is to evolve mutations. Thus the longer that ancient apes survived in Africa, the more they diverged into different species. Applying this principle to IE languages reveals that of the 445 living IE languages today, 313 are of the Indo-Iranian branch (Iranian and Indo-Aryan). Should this not lead us to conclude that Indo-Iran was the original homeland? New research on the PIE in any case, led by Johanna Nichols, has brought the homeland to the Bactria Margiana Archeological Complex (BMAC), an area just north of Kashmir. Nichols is almost there, as we’ll shortly see. Igor Tonoyan-Belyayev argues that the BMAC was a secondary source of PIE dispersals, coming into prominence some time after the original center in India.

English dispersed across the globe and has become a primary language in India, but very few of us have British genes. The religion of one tribe in the Middle East, in a few centuries, spread across the planet, but Arabian genes are not found in Muslims outside Arabia, nor is the expansion of Islam today accompanied by the dispersal of ethnic Saudi tribes. Chenghis Khan’s raid across Eurasia is said to have left his genes among many of us, and Mongols were lords of the land for a long time. But the Mongolian language does not exist today outside of a small tract of land wedged between Russia and China, and 50% of the current populace there follows a religion originated elsewhere (Buddhism). Mongols that conquered India are not even represented with Mongoloid features, their rulers acted out in Bollywood by the likes of Hrithik Roshan. When India acquired the culture of cricket it came with an internal terminology rooted in English, but that didn’t turn Indian genes British. Similarly, the spread of chess from India did not include the injection of Indian genes into all chess players. Language, culture and genes are inherited in the same way- from our parents. But they change and flow very differently from each other. When English became my primary language, when my ability to read Hindi atrophied, I did not become any less my parents’ child. My genetic analysis a thousand years from now will reveal nothing about the language I spoke at my deathbed, the sports I played, the kind of art I engaged in, the gods I prayed to, or the meaning behind any rituals I engaged in

But AIT proponents want us to believe that linguistics can tell us all of this. Theories on language origin and dispersal have been conflated with race, genetics and ethnicity, and circular logic is used to prove a priori narratives. An example of this comes from the case of Brahui, the language spoken by a Balochi tribe of the same name. When it was discovered that Brahui is a part of the Dravidian language family, AIT proponents happily proclaimed this as clinching evidence of the standard AIT narrative- that IE speaking Aryan people invaded northern India and the Harappan civilisation, forcing the latter’s Dravidian people into peninsular India (notice the implicit equation of language with ethnicity). Brahui was a remnant of that Dravidian populace, we were told. But linguists such as HH Hock and Joseph Elfenbein later showed that Brahui was the relic of a recent northward migration of Dravidian-speaking people, likely between 1000 and 1500 AD (other linguists continue to disagree, leaving it for us to decide how much weight to place in any linguistic conclusion). In other words, Brahui in Balochistan has nothing to do with Aryans of 1500 BC or earlier! It was only circular logic, a kind of fatal tautology, which allowed AIT proponents to take the evidence of Brahui and fit it into an a priori narrative.

More recently this has been done with genetics. Much has been made about an influx of an R1a haplogroup in India after around 1500 BC. This lines up well with the a priori narrative of AIT- that Aryan people with Vedic languages and culture invaded India after 1500 BC (it may be called a migration but the result is the same). Viola! This R1a-Z93 is then equated to be a kind of Aryan gene, and its influx after 1500 BC is taken as proof of AIT. But as we will see, whoever the Aryans were, they were already indigenous to India in 3000 BC, so it could not have been them entering after 1500 BC. Further, Indian tradition records the influx of all kinds of Central Asian tribes- Kambojas, Hūṇas, Śākas, Yavanas, Uttarakurus and more after 1500 BC and especially in the 1st millennium BC. This R1a influx could as easily have been them, and genetic influx in itself tells us nothing about the language or culture of the people who brought it. To add to this, genetics now speculates that the R macro-family first originated in India and spread to Europe. Even if it originated elsewhere, its parent clade P decidedly originated in India. What are we to make of that? Should this be used as proof that ancient Indians spread Saṃskṛtam and Vedic beliefs across Eurasia? Of course not, for circular logic is just that, and genetic dispersals should not be conflated with linguistic or cultural ones.

In fact, genetic data can neatly map onto any number of imagined scenarios. Take the example of a break in the genealogical record between the Ṛgvedic Pūru-Bhāratas and the Mahābhārata’s Kuru-Bhāratas. Very little information is available around Kuru, the Kaurava patriarch, and his descent from a Bhārata prince is wrapped in myth and mystery. If we date the Mahābhārata to somewhere in the middle of the 2nd millennium BC, the Kuru dynasty’s founding dates to 2000-1900 BC. Tradition also informs us of the Uttarakurus, a tribe living north of Kashmir that Talageri equates to Tocharian. But the more common reading is Northern Kurus, while their connection to Indian Kurus is unclear. The Uttarakuru area roughly corresponds to the Russian regions east of the Urals. It could be imagined that the Kurus are migrant descendants of the Steppe Uttarakurus who entered India in 2000-1500 BC, and that they are composed primarily of elite male warriors.

This (unsupported) imagination concedes to a kind of elite-dominance invasion- the Kuru bloodline is originally foreign to India, but establishes itself in major kingdoms and emerges as the primary dynasty. But equally does this evidence that we need not equate everything Vedic with everything Aryan. The primary Ṛgvedic period is long over by the time Kurus rise to power, and Vedic and Paurāṇika tradition is compiled by Veda Vyāsa who is indigenous to India. It also shows that speculation can take many routes, and the same genetic data can be used to support any number of narratives. The foreign-Kurus fabrication allows for foreign cultural and technological aspects to enter India through them, and none of it need posit an AIT like scenario. Add to this theories on origin of the proto-Turkic people, which favour an origin near modern Xinjiang-Mongolia in the late 3rd millennium BC and a dispersal west in the following millennia. The genetic story of humanity is hardly complete, yet enthusiasm to tell India its history on the basis of a few genetic immigrations is curiously replete. This history builds its narrative only through genetic influx into India, and makes no mention of the precursors to these genes that decidedly originated in and emigrated from India!

On this note let’s acknowledge that we do in fact know what an ‘Aryan invasion’ could look like, for we have the complete trail and record of this in Europe. The genetic composition and material culture in central Europe changed drastically in around the 4th-3rd millennia BC. Populations were replaced by newcomers from the east, bringing with them a new culture and physical type. This culture was the same as later found among Celts, Germans and Italics- indicating that it dispersed further into Europe. The current theory has these people emerging from the Yamnaya culture in the Pontic Steppe, and they have been equated to Aryans. Whether or not the last part is true, we know that when a small, primarily male, elite band invades a local, settled populace, then the signs are evident in material culture. In India, this is a rare case where the absence of evidence is indeed the evidence of absence, so consummate is said absence. Europe might not even have been invaded just once. From 4400 BC in Varna, Bulgaria have been found hundreds of graves which show stratification between the natives (at lower levels) and an intrusive elite (at higher levels). While nothing here indicates an invasion per se, it shows that Europe faced successive immigrations from the east that replaced existing populations and cultures. These elements are not found in the Indian subcontinent at all, and it explains why reputationists pounce on a genetic influx with desperation.

The Yamnaya culture’s enduring association to PIE reflects Western civilisation’s search for its ethnic and linguistic genesis. Reputationist sophistry should not make us think that indigenism is unique to or even characteristic of Indian thought. Close to 50% of European genes (on average) are comprised of the R1a haplogroup that spread there between 3000-2000 BC, and entered India in the late 2nd millennium BC. Even if scholarly circles work with dispassion, the European mind is still fascinated by the idea of horse-riding, meat-eating, well-built, destined-for-world-conquest warrior classes invading from the Steppe and dominating the European landscape. Even now there’s a reluctance to consider that Yamnaya ancestors might have come from further east, that the true cradle of pre-Christian European culture, language and genetics could be in a country such as India.

Unfortunately for this vision however, tracing upwards the family tree of R1a leads one to India. Archaeological migration patterns in Eurasia have a clear east-to-west direction. And on linguistic grounds Michel Danino’s critique stands unchallenged. After two centuries of work linguists have not been able to agree on a PIE homeland or nature of dispersal. Options are the Steppe, Anatolia, the BMAC and India. When we bring in additional evidence from text and archaeology the weight points overwhelmingly to India. But a final point about Comparative Linguistics and its relevance to understanding Indian history is captured by Sudarshan and Madhusudan in their paper The Science and Nescience of Comparative Linguistics, where they assess the history of this discipline from various angles to conclude what we’ve seen examples of:

“*A sober analysis of the field will highlight that much of the methods and conclusions are driven by selective data, arbitrary methods and flawed interpretations*.”

Even JP Mallory agrees- “*A solution to the IE problem will more than likely be as dependent on a re-examination of the methodology and terminology involved as much as on the actual data themselves*.”

What we have here then is a case of an Aryan Invasion, which under the lack of evidence was modified to a Migration, and in modern settings is the harmless dispersal of language and culture with innocent populations, based primarily on a field where critique argues a reassessment of the entire methodology and interpretations to begin with! It should be clear that rather than getting lost in AIT vs. AMT debates, we should settle for a single terminology and point instead to the absurdity of the entire narrative. In this book we prefer Invasion since it better expresses what’s implied in any scenario- domineering foreign imports that have no evidence.