---
title: lost manvantaras
sno: 37
---

The 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th manvantaras are a kind of dark age in Indian history. The Paurāṇika explanation for this is that history is cyclical and repetitive. The events of one age recur in the next, and personalities of one era are reborn again to play similar roles in history. Therefore the Purāṇas repeatedly resist an elaboration of these manvantaras, claiming it would take “hundreds of years” to recount the events of each manvantara in complete detail. Some accounts make the 2nd-5th Manus the sons of Priyavrata, whereas others give different origins for each.

The 2nd Manu, Svārociṣa, is born to Varuthinī, an Apsarā and Kali, a Gandharva. His sons are placed near Kāmarūpa, modern Assam. The 3rd Manu, Uttama, is born to Uttānapāda and wages war with Rākṣasas and Nāgas. The 4th Manu, Tāmasa, and his descendants are placed near modern Gujarat, and the 5th Manu, Raivata, is born there to a king named Durgama. Clearly the Paurāṇika accounts are confused about these manvantaras. Some trace them directly to Priyavrata while others give them different origins and place them in different parts of India. One interpretation is that these manvantaras too date to before Svāyambhuva, which might be true if the Manus are Priyavrata’s descendants. Another is that they represent cultural aspects of groups/tribes that moved away from the Indian mainstream. Yet another explanation is that the generations-long conflict between Daityas and Ādityas frequently threw record-keeping into disarray, so that a legitimate way to map these manvantaras to history was lost.

All that’s really left to us is the name of each Manu and of the presiding deities and priests in each era. Svārociṣa Manu worshipped Devī like his ancestors did, and his clan likely spread to India’s east. Vipaścit was the Indra in his era and Ūrja, Prāṇa and Rṣabha were the primary ṛṣis. The third Manu, Uttama, also worshipped Devī and conducted pilgrimage to the Gaṅgā. We have no way of knowing whether this is a later geographical projection or actually indicates an antiquity to the sacredness of the Gaṅgā. The fourth Manu, Tāmasa, is placed near the Narmadā and the fifth Manu, Raivata, in modern Gujarat.

It seems that the Purāṇas have got their count mixed up, though deliberately so. They commence their account of history from Svāyambhuva Manu, so all records flow from him. Thus even the line of Priyavrata and all the memory it holds is shown to descend from the first Manu. In reality Priyavrata and his descendants date could from before the Younger Dryas, from the hidden Palaeolithic era when human beings were already converting India into a demographic heavyweight. The 2nd to 5th manvantaras could date from before 10,000 BC, and there’s no plausible way to show how far back in time they go. This is reflected in their ahistorical nature and the extremely sparse details available in them. When we find astronomical references in Indian texts that date to 15000 BC or even earlier, we can surmise that those were the times of Priyavrata and his sons.