---
title: mahabharata and the second tether
sno: 17
---

Some testimony for Indian record keeping comes from Roman and Greek sources in the 1st century AD. In Naturalis Historia, Roman historian Pliny the Elder writes that from Father Liber (Roman patriarchal figure) to Alexander the Great, the Indians counted the number of their kings to be 154 and and the years passed as 6,451. A century later Greek historian Arrian, writing largely from the accounts of Megasthenes, gave a similar count of 153 kings and 6,462 years.

From Vaivasvat Manu to the characters that fought the Mahābhārata war, the Purāṇas give us a list of 94 kings. A further 50 kings can be derived from the dynasties after Mahābhārata up to the time of Candragupta Maurya, giving us a figure of 143 kings. Given the ancient time period we’re talking about, it’s remarkable that different sources yield such close numbers and generations. In a cynical expression, even if these accounts all sprung from a single source, how could there have been such a single Indian source when India did not exist before the British blessed us with nationhood? When we assign twenty years to each generation we get a span of 3,000 years for 150 kings, but these accounts tell us that the time passed was more than double that. Clearly the accounts have not been kept consistently, and genealogies from the previous manvantaras were lost, though a history from them was remembered. This is to be expected when the history of one age becomes the myth of another, over and over again.

On the face of it, dating the Mahābhārata seems simple enough. We only have to count backwards from the Nanda dynasty to arrive at the generation that fought the war. Pargiter’s reconciled list from the Purāṇas counts 1,500 years as the gap between Mahāpadma Nanda and Parīkṣit- Arjuna’s grandson. Nanda’s coronation is dated to ~382 BC, which assigns 1932 BC as the date for Mahābhārata, allowing for half a century between Mahābhārata and Parīkṣit. But there are inconsistencies for the durations of reign given for intervening kings, and Mahāpadma is assigned an impossibly large duration of 88 years. A different reading counts 1,100 years between Parīkṣit and Candragupta Maurya, yielding 1420 BC as the date of Mahābhārata. Add to this a contention that the Greek Sandrocottus’ identification with Candragupta Maurya is incorrect. This forces a rechronologisation of all of early Indian history and for now is a fringe view, but the result would yield 2100 BC as the Mahābhārata’s date.

Another date comes from Āryabhaṭa’s account in 500 AD, where he assigns 3102 BC as the date when Kali Yuga began. This is supported by tradition when it affirms Kali Yuga to begin from Kṛṣṇa’s death, and astronomical readings of the date of his death yield the year 3102 BC. Since Kṛṣṇa participated in the Mahābhārata, this gives us ~3130 BC as its date. This date is inconsistent with geological data which confirms that the Sarasvatī was a fully functional river system in 3000 BC, while in the Mahābhārata it’s described to disappear in the desert and is no longer the Ṛgveda’s mighty river. Further, since there is no reference to Kali Yuga’s date before Āryabhaṭa, this date cannot be reconciled with other sources. A separate account from Varāhamihira fifty years after Āryabhaṭa yields 2449 BC as the date.

These dates have to be reconciled with internal chronology and with other sources. Taking the genealogical list from Manu to Kṛṣṇa as is gives us 94 generations, and assigning 20 years to each generation gives us 1,880 years as the complete duration of the Vedic age. Linguists such as Witzel criticise such a chronologisation on grounds that it implies the Ṛgveda was composed over two millennia. But that’s never the implication. What’s called the Vedic age includes proto-Vedic, pre-Vedic and post-Vedic periods as well, just like Harappan archaeology consists of pre, mature, late and post Harappan periods. It’s realistic to assume that the genealogies are not unbroken, and that there are several gaps between them. This allows us to place a liberal band of 2,500-2,000 years as the duration of the Vedic age, where we take it to commence with the 7th manvantara. Another note to be made is on the gap between generations. We tend to think the gap to be equal to an average human life-span, which is incorrect. The gap represents the average age at which a human reproduces, for that determines the number of years between parent and child. In fact, even if humans in the past lived for fantastically long periods, the gap between generations remains 20-30 years since that’s when humans usually reproduce. Across history this has been found to be a consistent average between generations and kings.

The kind of geopolitical scenario suggested in the Mahābhārata is not supported by archaeology in the 3rd millennium, and if we take it as an Iron Age text we must place it more in the 2nd millennium BC. Subhash Kak argues that the period after Mahābhārata represents an age of literary flowering, a period when the Vedas and other texts are compiled and given their final form. This can happen only under prosperous, stable living conditions- the kind suggestion by mature SSC between 2500-2000 BC. Conversely, if the Mahābhārata happened between 1900-1400 BC then the archaeological record does not suggest a period of cultural flowering after it.

Clearly any date we assign will be tentative, for many different traditions have to be reconciled for the actual figure, and it’s never completely consistent. If we stick to the tradition that assigns 1,500 years as the period between Parīkṣit and Mahāpadma Nanda, we arrive at ~1900 BC as the date for the Mahābhārata. This takes the primary Ṛgvedic period to the early 3rd millennium BC and beyond, consistent to Ṛgvedic evidence and to linguistic conjectures on a PIE split between 3500 and 2500 BC. The SSC matures in this chronology between the Ṛgvedic period and the Mahābhārata, under the dynastic rise of Bhāratas, Yādavas and Aikṣvākus primarily, as we’ll see. Giacomo Beneditti takes 1500 BC as the date for the Mahābhārata, and finds a number of plausible links between tradition and archaeology:

- The first settlements in the Delhi-Kurukshetra belt are dated to just before 1500 BC, around the time when tradition tells us that the Pāṇḍavas cleared the area and established their five towns- Indraprastha (Delhi), Soṇaprastha (Sonipat), Pāṇaprastha (Panipat), Tilaprastha (Tilpat) and Vyāghraprastha (Baghpat).
- Tradition attests that Kṛṣṇa’s Dvārakā was submerged under the ocean a few years after the Mahābhārata- ~1300 BC in this chronology. Most late Harappan sites in Gujarat have a break after 1400 BC, which agrees with tradition that the Yādavas abandoned their sites there and migrated to the Yamunā.
- Tradition also holds the date of Kṛṣṇa’s death as the advent of Kali Yuga. Post 1500 BC we see the flourishing of Ochre Ware and Painted Grey Ware cultures in the Gangetic Plains. Archaeologically, the Kali Yuga signals an end of the Sarasvatī civilisation and the rise of the Gangetic civilisation.

Beneditti’s work finds correlations between tradition and archaeology for other names in the genealogy, and paints a reasonable picture of early Indian dynasties and their impact on archaeological SSC. A problem in dating the Mahābhārata to 1500 BC is in the implied date for Kali Yuga, and this is where a nested model of yugas and manvantaras helps us chronologise events. Framing it within Āryabhaṭa’s astronomical dating of the Kali Yuga at 3102 BC, we get 4302 BC as the date for onset of Dvāpara Yuga. This is close to the date we get for Vaivasvat Manu if we date Mahābhārata to 1500 BC, and him to 2,500 years before that. Incidentally, 4004 BC is also the date of Creation according to Judeo-Christian mythology. The 7th manvantara marks the onset of Dvāpara within the major mahāyuga cycle, but also triggers a nested cycle within such that a minor Satya Yuga starts with Vaivasvat Manu. This allows us to reconcile tradition which says that Satya Yuga ended with Arjuna Kārtavīrya’s death at the hands of Rāma Jamadāgneya. The Satya Yuga talked of here is the nested one, and the minor Tretā following it ends with Rāma Dāśarathi’s victory over Rāvaṇa.

Tradition thus speaks of two different mahāyuga cycles and a single manvantara continuum, and the nested mahāyuga cycle within the major Dvāpara Yuga forms our historical window of Manu to Mahābhārata. Within this nested mahāyuga we have known markers for the four ages. Minor Satya or Kṛta Yuga starts with Vaivasvat and ends with the death of Arjuna Kārtavīrya. Minor Tretā Yuga commences with the reign of Sagara and ends with Rāma’s victory over Rāvaṇa. Minor Dvāpara Yuga ends with Kṛṣṇa’s death after the Mahābhārata, which marks the onset of minor Kali Yuga. If this seems confusing, it becomes clear in later parts of the text where it’s historically relevant.

Vaivasvat Manu is associated with the flood myth, a common archetype found across human mythologies. Two views exist on the issue of global floods. The first holds there to have been a single deluge now remembered in the myths of world cultures. The second reminds us that floods, whether riverine or oceanic, are a common feature and would have been doubly devastating to ancient cultures. Thus it’s not extraordinary that most cultures have flood myths in their tradition. Indian tradition associates both Svāyambhuva and Vaivasvat Manu with flood myths. In both cases Manu represents a civilisational reset. Whether this reset included a material reset or only a break in literary culture and record keeping, we cannot say. When we place the Mahābhārata at ~2000 BC, we get 4300 BC as the date for Vaivasvat. It’s tempting to link this to the break in skeletal record around 4500 BC, but that’s no different to the circular logic used in genetics to bring Aryans into India in 1500 BC. In any case, despite Vaivasvat’s flood myth and the break in skeletal record, places like Bhirrana and Rakhigarhi show continuous habitation during this period. Thus we cannot take the myth too literally. BB Lal found archaeological evidence for a flood-event during the 2nd millennium BC, but that’s too late for any plausible dating of Vaivasvat Manu.

The best we can say is that there was a break in record-keeping just before Vaivasvat Manu’s time, which is why a new age of humankind is considered to start with him. Already in his time there are other tribes and peoples- Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Kimpuruṣas, Piśācas and more. So he is not the first man in a literal sense, but that the particular continuum of record-keeping that’s represented in Vedic and Paurāṇika literature is of a broader culture that began in his time. In the succeeding millennia this culture spread over the Indian subcontinent, and interacted in various ways with other cultures while branching internally. This was the grand parliament of all the religions of the children of Manu (to borrow Talageri’s phrasing), or dharma, a thousand-branched, multi-level coherent tradition indigenous to the Indian subcontinent- a fractal maṇḍala. Vaivasvat Manu is the symbolic ancestor all people were linked to, the representation of an imperative for a civilisational-state in ancient Indian tradition-keeping. Contrary to an image of finding ethnic, racial or linguistic fault-lines, the ancient Indians diligently assimilated all and ascribed to them genealogies descending from Vaivasvat.

For our chronology then we take 1900 BC as the date for the Mahābhārata war, though there are good arguments for 1500 and 2400 BC, as well as astronomical hard data that argues for 3167 BC. At the upper end we place Vaivasvat Manu at around 4500 BC. Doing so allows us to link him both to the break in a skeletal record (as marker of a flood myth) and the commencement of a Dvāpara Yuga in 4302 BC. This gives us 2,500 years as the duration of the Vedic age. Within this period we’ll place figures such as Sudās, Arjuna Kārtavīrya, Māndhātṛ and Bharata at historically plausible markers which can be linked to archaeology. This is a tentative exercise by definition. Since the actual date for Mahābhārata could be off by 500-1,000 years, moving away from 1900 BC will have cascading effects for all other stories. The idea here is not to confirm actual historical personalities but to paint broad strokes that allow for plausible narratives. For example, our chronology places Bharata at around 3000 BC- the correct time for a dynasty to begin yoking the Harappan civilisation towards its mature phase. Any change in dates will remove Bharata from this position and render his story historically untrue. But the underlying tale of dynastic possibilities, of the kinds of figures who could have been rulers in that era and under what conditions- these will remain true. Whether the truth applies more to Bharata or to Divodāsa, his descendant generations later, its historicity remains valid. This then is the broad chronology the following text will use:

11502 BC -	Commencement of major Satya Yuga and 1st manvantara

6702 BC -	Commencement of major Tretā Yuga

4302 BC -	Commencement of major Dvāpara Yuga; of minor Satya Yuga; and 7th Mv.

3100 BC -	Major Kali Yuga begins; minor Satya Yuga ends

3000 BC -	Minor Tretā Yuga begins; founding of Bharata and Sagara dynasties

2400 BC - 	Minor Dvāpara Yuga begins; reign of Rāma Dāśarathi, Dāśarājña battle

1900 BC -	Mahābhārata war; minor Kali Yuga begins; end of Indian epoch-keeping

With this chronologisation complete, we can now begin our historical journey. To sum up the implication of this and the preceding chapters, we may visit the necessary premises the following journey is based on. Each leads to the next.

1. The Aryan invasion/migration/trickling-in paradigm is provably false. Instead, we have a multi-disciplinary reason to consider the northern India-Iran-BMAC region as the true PIE homeland. Therefore,
2. The Ṛgvedic people and those that lived in the SSC were not alien, foreign cultures but indigenous to the Indian subcontinent. Their timelines and histories coincide in many fascinating ways. Given this,
3. We can finally visit Paurāṇika stories from a modern, historical lens. And when we do so we find that they confirm, and are confirmed by, evidence from archaeology, linguistics and genetics. So, finally,
4. We can engage in plausible speculations on Indian history prior up to the Mahābhārata era. The early Holocene, the rise of agriculture, the advent of dynasties and kingdoms- these can now be given justifiable narratives. And fundamentally,
5. These narratives represent the organic Indian unity- they are our civilisational felt-experience- which is best described as a fractal maṇḍala.