---
title: mahabharata
sno: 69
---

A precursor to the Mahābhārata begins not with the Kuru-Bhāratas along the Sarasvatī, but with the mass of humanity that peoples the SSC in 2500 BC and after. We’ve seen how their civilisation matured under a federation of Pūrus, Ānavas and Yādavas, with tribes like Druhyu and Aikṣvāku at the peripheries. We read differences between Sothi-Siswal, Kot-Diji and Ravi cultures as manifestations of these different dynasties and their influences. The impetus for national unification exists strong, visible in the empires built by the Sāgaras and Bhāratas, even if the final conditions would be federal and autonomous. India in 2500 BC would have been as major a demographic heavyweight as it is now, so there are deep implications to what happened to these people once the Sarasvatī river system began dying.

It helps to realise that while everything Vedic = SSC, not everything SSC was = Vedic. In other words, Vedic culture was only one strand of the SSC. It experienced peak patronage under the Pūru-Bhāratas, and under the Kuru-Bhāratas it achieved formal organisation and transmission. But not all Indians conducted the Vedic yajña, nor did all participate in the Vedic chant, so what did the rest do? This is answered by Talageri’s strands of classical Hinduism:

- Vedic Strand- represented in the religions of Ānavas, Pūrus and Druhyus along with their respective ṛṣi allies of Bhārgavas, Āṅgirasas and Dasyus.
- Aikṣvāku Strand- an inward-looking religion based on philosophy, logic and spirituality. This was the seed of later Jain, Buddhist, Upanishadic and Cārvāka schools.
- Austric Strand- mapped to a linguistic group very broadly, and referring to the mass of Tantric, mystic and esoteric traditions rooted in eastern India.
- Dravidian Strand- again a broad linguistic grouping to include some central aspects of classical Hinduism- idol-worship, temple consecration and more- that seemingly arose in southern India.
- Yādava Strand- a naturalistic, cattle and fertility based tradition that’s best exemplified in SSC seals and motifs. It was given more to the worship of mountains, forests and rivers than to organised ritual.

Talageri asserts, not unfairly, that the Yādava strand represents a kind of religion prevalent over most of India, given its preference for local deities, mythologies and geographies. Archaeologically, it’s also the strand that maps best to what we know of the SSC people. For thousands of years then, this is the strand that’s witnessed the rise and fall of dynasties. Of the many comings-to and goings-from power of Pūru, Ānava and Aikṣvāku dynasts. Their internalised, pluralistic worldview helps them understand all other strands that come to dominate, however briefly, and they realise, with the wisdom of a common man, that a deeper synthesis is needed beyond political differences. Why else would these people care about a dynastic conflict internal to one branch of the Kuru-Bhāratas? Why else would this conflict become Bhāratavarṣa’s greatest war? The answer lies in Hinduism’s next, and arguably greatest, avatāra of Mahāviṣṇu.