---
title: mandhatra
sno: 47
---

We’ve arrived at a turning point. If cakravartin is one who moves the wheel of time, an epoch maker, then Māndhātṛ of the Aikṣvāku line stands handsome. But there need be a detailed digression before we get to the discernible facts about him. This is necessitated by ambiguity in his genealogical placement, and that of his sons and grandsons. Most Purāṇas give 50-60 Ailā generations from Vaivasvat Manu to the generation that fought the Mahābhārata war. But for Aikṣvākus over the same period we find 90 generations! The Bhāgavata Purāṇa for example shows 57 generations between Manu and Kṛṣṇa, but also 90 generations between Manu and Bṛhadbala, the Aikṣvāku participant in the Mahābhārata.

The problem begins with a case of two Yuvanaśvas in the Aikṣvāku line. The first Yuvanaśva was born nine generations after Manu and had a son named Śrāvasta. The second Yuvanaśva was born twenty generations after Manu, and his son was Māndhātṛ Yauvanāśva. Accepting this version gives us a total of 94 generations from Manu to Bṛhadbala. But for the same period we get around 60 kings in the Ailā lines. One way to resolve this is by positing that there were never two Yuvanaśvas, thus making Māndhātṛ and Śrāvasta brothers. It shortens the Aikṣvāku line, but creates other inconsistencies. The genealogy tells us that among Māndhātṛ’s sons and grandsons were Purukutsa and Trasadasyu respectively, but Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa only mentions Susandhi as Māndhātṛ’s son. There’s an entire line of kings in the Aikṣvākus that is present in the Purāṇas, somewhat attested to in the Ṛgveda, but entirely absent from the Rāmāyaṇa. Resolving this needs reconciliation of all data on Māndhātṛ, Trasadasyu and Purukutsa.

As Talageri has convincingly identified, Aikṣvākus are referred to in the Ṛgveda as Tṛkṣis, supported by the occurrence of this word alongside other tribal groupings. Māndhātṛ appears as a distant ancestor in hymns such as RV 1-112-13, 8-39-8 and 8-40-12. In RV 112, Kutsa Āṅgirasa alludes that the Aśvins helped Māndhātṛ and Bharadvāja in their battles against Dāsas. It confirms to us that the Bhāradvāja clan did not begin with Bharata in a later era, and that any attempt to differentiate between the many Bharadvājas of history will be a difficult task. RV 8-39 by Nābhāka Kāṇva reiterates Māndhātṛ’s battles against Dasyus, this time thanking Agni for the aid he provided. In the succeeding hymn, Nābhāka uses the phrase navīyo avāci which Griffith translated as “*we have sung anew*” while Jaminson-Brereton prefer “*a newer speech has been spoken*.” If the latter interpretation is correct, it supports the intuition that many Ṛgvedic hymns were later compositions, in the contemporary dialect, of past events- an intuition supported by Śri Aurobindo:

“*It is even possible that its (RV’s) most ancient hymns are a comparatively modern development or version of a more ancient lyric evangel couched in the freer and more pliable forms of a still earlier human speech*.”

The Māndhātṛ hymns together do not allude to any relationship between Māndhātṛ, Purukutsa and Trasadasyu, but in RV 10-134 Māndhātṛ is attributed as composer with the patronymic of Yauvanāśva. The relationship between Purukutsa and Trasadasyu though is explicit in a number of hymns. Trasadasyu Paurukutsya is attributed as composer of RV 4-42, and hymns like 7-19 and 8-19 confirm Trasadasyu to be the son of Purukutsa. A reference is repeatedly made to Indra helping Purukutsa destroy 7 Dāsa autumnal strongholds. The specific expression is saptam puram śāradī, where puram is taken as stronghold and śāradī, as derived from śarad, is a clear reference to ‘of the autumn.’ This tells us that (at least some) Dāsa tribes were semi-nomadic, their settlements only seasonal. It reminds us of the Paurāṇika ghoṣas- pseudo-settlements of wandering pastoralists and herdsmen.

The reference to Purukutsa in RV 1-63-7 by Nodha Gautama is taken as confirmation he was contemporary to Sudās Bhārata, but no strong support for this really emerges from the hymn. Like many Ṛgvedic hymns addressed to Indra, it lists a number of enemies he slew and the people he helped through these acts. For example, verse 3 mentions he slew Suṣṇa on behalf of Kutsa, and in verse 4 he bests Vṛtra and the Dasyus. While Purukutsa and Sudās are both mentioned in verse 7, the overall context is of listing many of Indra’s past battles and nothing suggests they were contemporary. RV 1-174 by Agastya Maitrāvaruṇi again refers to the 7 autumnal strongholds Indra helps Purukutsa destroy, and calls his enemies those with ‘scornful speech.’ This expression has implications on PIE origin and dispersal, explored in Chapter 6. The hymn contains another recurrent theme- that of Indra helping Yādavas and Turvaśas cross (rivers) to their well-being. A similar reference to saptam puram śāradī and Purukutsa in RV 6-20-10 by Bharadvāja Bārhaspatya again does not necessarily confirm that he’s contemporaneous to either Divodāsa or Sudās.

It’s clear from such hymns that both Māndhātṛ and Purukutsa were in conflict with Dāsas and Dasyus, and that they were allied to the Pūru-Bhāratas. RV 4-42 by Trasadasyu indicates that, at some point, Purukutsa might have been captured by his enemies. To the latter’s wife, through sacrifice initiated by the ṛṣis, is born the son Trasadasyu. Genealogical confusion is derived from this hymn by mistranslation of the word daurgaha in verse 8, interpreted as ‘son of Durgaha’ by Griffith and left as is by JB. This is an example of the vexing problem of Saṃskṛtam. We have no way of knowing whether Daurgaha means a ‘son of Durgaha’ or just a descendant, for the word can equally imply either. In this case the problem goes deeper. The suggestion has been made that Daurgaha is in fact a name for a horse, and the sacrifice of this horse is what verse alludes to. This is supported by Yāska’s Nighanṭu, where he translates ‘Daurgaha’ as the synonym for a horse.

In other words, the Ṛgveda only suggests that Trasadasyu is a son of Purukutsa. It tells us nothing about Purukutsa’s own parentage, for ‘Daurgaha’ is not his patronymic but the name for a horse. Another layer of confusion is added by Paurāṇika testimony, which says that Trasadasyu is an epithet for Māndhātṛ himself! But the same Purāṇas also list Trasadasyu as a grandson of Māndhātṛ, so something is perplexingly amiss. One resolution to all of this is to posit that the Aikṣvāku line split after Māndhātṛ. One remained in Ayodhyā while the other, for reasons we will explore, migrated to the greater Punjab and Afghanistan region. The latter line was known to the Ṛgvedic Aryans and features in their hymns. Equally was it unknown to sūtas of Ayodhyā, thus these kings do not feature in the Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa. The ambiguity then is around Māndhātṛ’s descendants, while his parentage has never been in doubt. This allows us to accept two Yuvanaśvas in the Aikṣvāku line, one the father of Śrāvasta at generation 10, and one the father of Māndhātṛ at generation 20.

Some argue that the Aikṣvākus were originally placed in modern Punjab and Pakistan, not in Ayodhyā. Support comes from the Gomal and Harayu rivers in Afghanistan/Pakistan, cognate to Gomatī and Sarayū in eastern Uttar Pradesh. And RV 8-19 indicates that Trasadasyu campaigned or sacrificed along the river Suvāstu (Swat). Previously this was used to evidence an Aryan invasion, that invading tribes encountered the Gomal and Harayu first, and named later rivers in their memory. Even if we ignore that the Aikṣvākus are completely different to the Ṛgvedic Aryans, the Paurāṇika account of Māndhātṛ still suggests the opposite direction- a section of Aikṣvākus originally located in the Gangetic Plains migrated to Afghanistan and carried some river names with them. Once we’ve resolved Ṛgvedic confusion that only seems to suggest that Purukutsa’s father was named Durgaha, or that he was contemporary to Sudās, we’re able to identify the story described in Paurāṇika tradition.

A number of synchronisms are well established around Māndhātṛ. We know he married Bindumatī, Śaśabindu Caitraratha’s daughter. His maternal grandfather was Matinara, a Pūru king. He’s contemporaneous to Aṅgāra of the Druhyus, Sudhanvana and Apratīratha of the Pūrus, Janamejaya of the Ānavas, Marutta of the Turvaśa, and Asura leaders such as Jaya, Śūṇa, Vṛhadratha and Nriga. This gives us many different confirmations for where to place him, and they all line up. We’re left with no choice but to place him at generation 21, one generation after his father-in-law Śaśabindu. This lines him up exactly with Aṅgāra, puts him two generations after Matinara, and a generation after Janamejaya of the Ānavas.

In the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, Māndhātṛ first finds mention in a list of people, who through the grace of Viṣṇu, were able to perceive māyā- or the illusion of I-ness and mine-ness. The Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa lists Māndhātṛ as an Āṅgirasa, thus confirming his religious affiliation. We know that fire-rituals were introduced among the Āryas by Bhṛgu ṛṣis, and that Yayāti married the daughter of one. But among the Aikṣvākus it could have been brought by Āṅgirasas, supported by the Ṛgveda where all hymns featuring Māndhātṛ, Purukutsa or Trasadasyu sans one are composed by Āṅgirasas or ṛṣis aligned to them.

As is the case with most notable figures in the Purāṇas, there’s a fanciful tale of Māndhātṛ’s birth and naming. His father had many wives but no heir- a problem several Aikṣvāku kings face throughout history. Stricken, he goes to a group of sages and asks for their help. This too is a recurrent theme. Rulers across tribes and dynasties approached the ṛṣis for help when without an heir, and in many cases the ṛṣis did the deed too. It shouldn’t be controversial to note that in all these stories we are told little of the mother-to-be’s agency. Due to an unintended error and a misdirected boon, Yuvanaśva himself becomes pregnant, and the child that’s born is left in the forest. But the child is taken up by the Devas, and when they ask among themselves who would breastfeed him, Indra is said to have replied Māṁ Dhātā, meaning he will *Drink Me*, giving our cakravartin his name. This is a lesson denouncing inheritance or the over-riding concern for biological heirs. It didn’t matter that Māndhātṛ had a controversial birth, or that his father abandoned him, for he was fed by Indra himself.

This theme continues in Māndhātṛ’s life, and an example is set when his kingdom faces a drought for many years. Helpless against this ravage of nature, the distraught king approaches the sages for their counsel. They inform him that only a brāhmin can conduct penance, but in his kingdom there’s a śūdra who does so too. Māndhātṛ only has to kill this śūdra and the rains will return. But the king refuses, for killing an innocent person goes against his morals. He explains that only one’s actions determine one’s varṇa, and that a śūdra who conducts penance is in fact a brāhmin- his birth placing no limit on his stature. Pleased with this rejoinder, the sages suggest a different (innocuous) appeasement and the rains finally return. This is why we should not view the Purāṇas as ‘brāhminic’ or priestly texts. The brāhmin orthodoxy we imagine ought to have removed such stories from the Purāṇas, if our imagination was actually true.

Through Māndhātṛ’s synchronisms we can understand the geo-political situation of his time. The Aikṣvāku line at this point is still limited to around Ayodhyā, with the city of Śrāvastī being established further north many generations ago. On the north and east, the Videhas and Vaiśālīs flourish respectively. To the south is the kingdom of Kāśī, which by this time has experienced generations of political continuity. To the immediate west, north on the Yamunā and centered on the Sarasvatī, are the many Pūru kingdoms. Pūru’s line has split into a few branches by now through his three sons. But there could be other lines as well, and one of these lines is is maternally related to Māndhātṛ. These combined Pūru kingdoms occupy the land from modern Prayagraj to Delhi/Haryana/north Rajasthan/western UP.

To their north, expanding across modern Punjab, Kashmir and beyond are the Ānavas, at this stage under the leadership of one Janamejaya. Further west, occupying modern Pakistan and Afghanistan are the Druhyus under king Aṅgāra. And south of the Yamunā are the many Yādava people who are related to Māndhātṛ by marriage. There have been two cakravartins in the past few centuries, the latest Māndhātṛ’s own father-in-law. From Māndhātṛ’s vantage point in Ayodhyā, he can see how the Ailā people have spread across northern Āryavarta and beyond. All this while his people have been content with their small kingdom.

But content no more is what Māndhātṛ clearly decided. The document of his wars paints a vivid picture of his rampage across north India. Evidence that this might have been triggered by a Druhyu-Ānava-Pūru conflict is gleaned from the Ṛgveda by Talageri. He points to the references to Māndhātṛ, Purukutsa and Trasadasyu as evidence that these Aikṣvāku kings helped the pre and Ṛgvedic Pūrus in some fashion, and the name Trasadasyu explicitly translates to ‘Tormentor of Dasyus,’ an epithet used for Māndhātṛ as well. But the many Pūru sub-clans are in no way united, for Māndhātṛ battles both Sudhanvana and Apratīratha of the Pūrus. The only Pūru line not listed in his enemies is that of his maternal grand-father, but even that line is thrown into disarray soon after him. The entire Pūru family tree in fact ends after Māndhātṛ, revived only many generations later by Duṣyanta.

The full thrust of his war however is against Ānavas and Druhyus. He vanquishes Janamejaya in a single day and night of war, and to the west he defeats Aṅgāra of the Druhyus. The latter are forced to migrate further west, where Aṅgāra’s descendant Gāndhāra will establish a kingdom in his own name. These campaigns are remembered in the Ṛgveda as Māndhātṛ’s battles against Dāsas and Dasyus. This is a period when sites like Rehman Dheri, Amri and Kot Diji are established on the Sindhu. Rehman Dheri is located on the Gomal river in the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa district of Pakistan, Amri is downstream in modern Sindhu, while Kot Diji is a few hundred kilometers north of it. By 3500 BC all three are fortified towns- evidencing the existence of conflict and warfare. Śaśabindu and Māndhātṛ’s combined era represents a pushing out of the Pūru-Yadu-Aikṣvāku people, who are all maritally related in their royal lines.

Also established during this period is Kalibangan, while Bhirrana proceeds without break through its early Harappan phase. The archaeological culture near Kot Diji in this phase is called the Kot Diji culture, while that in Bhirrana and Kalibangan is the Sothi-Siswal culture. While there are broad similarities between Kot Diji and Sothi-Siswal ceramics, the former are characterised by fortified cities. This is confirmed by Paurāṇika accounts. Radiating from within India, the military thrust at this stage pushed out towards the Sindhu. The people living here needed to protect their cities well, while those on the Sarasvatī proceeded towards civilisation unchecked.

Across this swathe of destruction, if we are to wonder why the evidence isn’t found in the cities of the SSC then the answer is self-evident. The SSC at this stage is a pre-Harappan composite of the Pūru people, with the Yādavas occupying the lower reaches of the Yamunā and expanding westwards through Rajasthan. His own wife a daughter of those people, Māndhātṛ’s conquest has left their kingdom completely alone. And with the Pūrus he has waged war but hasn’t indulged in city-destruction, a trait that has yet to appear among India’s monarchs. In any case, Māndhātṛ only has pre-Bronze Age technology to arm his soldiers with. In a way his rampage has left most of the SSC entirely alone, and cutting through the Pūrus it has disturbed more the ancestral homelands of the Ānavas and Druhyus than anything in between. The situation is similar if we have him starting from the Gomal river and battling Druhyus and Ānavas before reaching the Pūru kingdoms, beyond which are the kingdoms of his in-laws which he leaves untouched.

Māndhātṛ also battles Marutta Turvaśa, though we cannot be sure where this happens or when in his reign. This reign has brought war to four of the pañcajana tribes. It’s as close as Āryavarta has reached to an Aikṣvāku vs. Ailā war, and this isn’t the last of it. Many a fictional retelling have thus visualised a great Sūryavaṁśa (Aikṣvāku) vs. Somavaṁśa (Ailā) conflict in India’s past, and the truths are not too far from the fiction. But we have no reason to suspect that the conflict was ideological, of sun-worship vs. moon-worship, or of sacred-Agni vs. non-sacred fire. The situation we see is clearly material and political. This is why it doesn’t disturb the archaeological record. Pottery styles, burial practices and farming styles all continue unbroken, for prevalent even from the age of Gods and Demons is a democratic standard for how rulers and conquerors are to conduct themselves, underpinned by the social order sustained by magician-shamans.

The wheel of time, of culture, of civilisation has been moved forward. Many people will claim descent from the Pūrus a few generations hence, but their lines currently lay broken. The Ānavas will feature as enemies again soon and even later in the Ṛgveda, but the message has been delivered- they are destined to move out of the Indian horizon. And the Druhyus are distant people already, aggression from within India forcing their people ever westward into ‘mleccha’ lands. If at all we wish to find ethnic and cultural signs of proto-Indo-European dispersals, then Māndhātṛ’s campaign begs to be considered. From here on the Ailā lines will primarily focus on the Pūru and Yadu, but even the Pūru will be revived only as the Bhārata. Druhyus will no longer be ‘Indian’ in a geographical sense, and the Ānavas will have to fight to retain their place. As we’ll later see, even the current peace between Yādavas and Aikṣvākus will not last forever.

As evident is the success of Māndhātṛ’s campaign, is also that the kingdom did not survive after him. The Ṛgvedic evidence is clear- one line of rulers continued in the Greater Punjab region through his descendants Purukutsa and Trasadasyu. This line was unknown to the Gangetic sūtas for a long time, and the lacuna results in general confusion in Aikṣvāku genealogy. These are uncertainties we can live with, for in the larger scheme we know the consequence of his life and reign. In most genealogies the primary Aikṣvāku line continues after Māndhātṛ through Purukutsa and Trasadasyu, and in this line also descend Sagara, Bhagīratha, Rāma and others. Possibly, it’s the Susandhi that Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa lists as Māndhātṛ’s heir who continues the line in Ayodhyā.

When we consider that Ṛgvedic Purukutsa’s father is not actually mentioned, and that the title Trasadasyu is an epithet for different people including Māndhātṛ, we can speculate that there might well have been two Purukutsas and two Trasadasyus. In an extreme interpretation RV 4-42 is composed by Māndhātṛ himself, under the title of Trasadasyu. He tells us here how he must sacrifice his son to his own ambitions and conquest. As an epithet, Puru + Kutsa could be interpreted either as ‘Contemptor of the Pūrus’ or ‘Thunderbolt of the Pūrus.’ And should we be pedantic about the difference between Puru and Pūru here? In all scenarios the conclusion remains that the Aikṣvāku kingdom did not expand as a result of Māndhātṛ’s campaign. He defeated many rival kings but his own kingdom fell in disarray after his death. There could have been succession battles and fragmentations both, in a kind of proto-template for what would happen of Alexander’s ambitious campaign across Eurasia millennia later. As complete was the success of the campaign itself, as stark was its utter breakdown after the leader’s death.

RV 10-134 is attributed entirely to Māndhātṛ, where he prays to Indra and gives us a glimpse into the mind of such a cakravartin. There are hints here that the conqueror is not all that benevolent (few conquerors are), and that he’s aware of his own stubborn wickedness. Māndhātṛ appeals to Indra to kill these thoughts within him, to quell his inner malevolence and make slack his taut bow. We find here a conqueror who wishes to rest, to put aside his imperial tendencies. At the end of the hymn he even assures Indra that he remains devout. He isn’t obstinate, he can be salvaged. If we do not see in Māndhātṛ’s campaign a proto-Alexander, then in his appeal to Indra we can at least find a proto-Aśoka, a remorseful conqueror. In any case, given the story of his birth and naming by Indra himself, is there any doubt who was the first Devanampriya- Beloved of the Gods?

As grandiose as it sounds, Māndhātṛ’s era has global implications. It falls during the broad period of proto-Anatolian and proto-Tocharian dispersals from the PIE homeland, which in Chapter 6 will be firmly established in north India. We may also surmise that the era represents one state in a longer period of dispersals, itself commencing from the last wars between Daityas and Ādityas. Māndhātṛ’s campaign displaces several incumbent tribes in north Bhāratavarṣa such that they disperse towards Ketumāla and Bhadravarṣa, carrying with them linguistic precursors to Anatolian and Tocharian. The next wave of PIE dispersals would be a few centuries hence, generating true precursors to the Europeans branches of IE languages.