---
title: svayambhuva manu
sno: 22
---

Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā. The Father and Mother, the Patriarch and the Matriarch, that all Indian tradition traces its roots to. It’s better to take them as mythic composites than any actual personalities. Perhaps Svāyambhuva, so called as he is the son of Svāyam Bhu or Brahmā, is the memory of ancestry prior to the Holocene. Or perhaps he represents the first leader among survivors of the Younger Dryas. Perhaps he is, as tradition indicates, a combined memory of both. A flood myth exists in Svāyambhuva’s own time which a later section details. Armed with the intent to find a historical marker for Svāyambhuva Manu, his flood myth combined with the Holocene gives us 11000-10500 BC as a tentative band for his time, which is reasonably close to 11502 BC, the date of onset for major Satya Yuga.

True to the mission given to them by Brahmā, Svāyambhuva and Śatarūpā produce two sons and three daughters. One daughter, Ākūti, is married to a sage named Ruci. Their children are Yajña and Dakṣiṇā. This allows us to speculate that ritual sacrifice and donation were cultural aspects of life in early Mesolithic India. One is also tempted to wonder whether Dakṣiṇā first represented female donation, as in the gifting away of a daughter in marriage. On this note we may add that the Dakṣin-naire supreme, Dakṣa, gave away several daughters in marriage. Whether the speculation is true or not, Ākūti’s children’s names indicate that social contracts and sacred ritual precede early farming and animal husbandry. This makes sense, for humans would have needed codes for cooperation even during a nomadic existence, when tribes frequently encountered one another and established relationships through performing similar rituals, celebrating festivals together, or material/marital exchanges- failing which the exchange would certainly be martial. This is why ‘Rākṣasa’ is unlikely to be an ethnic appellation. Instead it was simply the title used for any tribe that didn’t play by the same rules as “us.”

We are thus met with a glimpse of why dharma is considered sanātana, or eternal. How far back must one reach within Indian civilisational memory to find a discernible origin point for dharma? If it all began with Brahmā, then dharma is as old as human consciousness itself, or perhaps older- emerging from the primate mind. In his work The Heathen in His Blindness, Prof. SN Balagangadhara shows how pre-Christian cultures worked on a framework of *traditio*, a notion quite different to that of *religio*. Summarised as the passed-down wisdom of one’s community and ancestors, *traditio* was an organic, bottom-up social framework. As such it had no discernible beginning, it was sanātana.

Another daughter of Svāyambhuva, Devahūti, is married to Kardama- one of Brahmā’s early sons. Some traditions say that their son was Kapila of Sāṅkhya fame. This is possibly a later addition to antiquate him, but nothing in Sāṅkhya inherently excludes an old tradition with long transmission. Devahūti is a whole matriarch unto herself, for her many daughters were married to Brahmā’s other sons. Kalā was married to Marīcī, and their children were Kaśyapa and Pūrṇimā. Anāsuyā was married to Atri. Śraddhā was married to Aṅgira, and their children are important figures we later discuss. Havirbhū married Pulastya, and their children were Agastya and Viśrava. These latter names likely represent a tradition from southern India. Agastya is associated with the south even in Vedic times, and Tamil tradition considers him a founding father. Viśrava in turn was a progenitor to southern monarchs such as Rāvaṇa. The daughters Gatī, Kriyā, Khyātī and Arundhatī were married to Pulaha, Krātu, Bhṛgu and Vasiṣṭha respectively.

All of these are not literal truths. The primary Indian ṛṣis did not all arise simultaneously, nor did a single matriarch birth wives for all of them. But the narrative hints at the matrilineality of early humans, and the importance given to ṛṣis in their cultures. Many reasons exist to delink the Vedic and pre-Vedic ṛṣis from the modern image of a religious priest. As holders of esoteric information and sacred lore, as keepers of ritual and sacrifice, ṛṣis were more magicians and shamans- men who linked the physical world with imperceivable layers. Svāyambhuva’s third daughter, Prasūti, was married to Dakṣa and had several daughters. These were married to Kaśyapa, Dharma and others and birthed some early human cultures such as Daityas, Ādityas and Dānavas. These stories are not mere myths. Daityas and Dānavas acquired moral layers much later in history, but at the earliest epochs they are actual nomadic tribes.

Where might Svāyambhuva Manu have lived? This is difficult to ascertain, for clear geographical indicators are extremely sparse, and those that exist could be projection from later eras. Given that Svāyambhuva’s patrilineal descendants do not appear in Daitya-Āditya stories and vice versa, we may speculate that these people were initially separated in geography. We can think of two survival angles after the onset of Holocene. From southern India, humans with their erstwhile coastlines submerged would have pushed inland and northwards along the coasts. From the Himālaya and Tibet, glacial period refugees would have moved south into the now fertile and habitable plains. Perhaps Svāyambhuva is better placed in the latter location, and the mingling of these different survivor populations created the proto-languages and lineages of later eras.

Another resonance the early ages find with actual protohistory is through evidence of goddess worship. Svāyambhuva and his immediate descendants all worshipped aspects of Devī, in some cases fashioning idols of her. Svāyambhuva is also credited with instituting sun-worship among his people. This hints to the antiquity of sun, goddess and idol worship in Indian tradition. It shows us some of the earliest layers in the fractal maṇḍala. Our first memorable ancestors are presented to us as people with deep reverence for nature, symbolised to them as the sun, and for the generative power of life and creation, prakṛtī. At the time of Svāyambhuva Manu these are but idle threads, but as we go forward in history we see such threads coalesce to form the Indian felt-experience. What may appear as simple sun-worship to our eyes will eventually attain the radiant heights of Vedantic thought, where light is equated to consciousness. And the mother goddess-worship that is common to many human societies, in India, will lead to profound realisations on Puruṣa and Prakṛtī. This happens when civilisation is entrenched and sustained over a long period, as it will be over the next several millennia.

It’s fair to ask- is there any historicity to Svāyambhuva at all? Was there ever a figure remotely like him, a man whose five children literally populated an entire civilisation? When we understand how human populations survived through cataclysmic bottlenecks, this in itself is not implausible. But that history would remember the literal figures is unlikely, even if yDNA and mtDNA lineages prove that such humans did exist. We should instead ask- why does literature take such pains to point to a common origin? Even if Svāyambhuva is completely mythic, the myth alludes to origins of cultural continuity and the memory of a common source. It tells us, in explicit terms, what the ancient Indians willed about their own organic unity- they saw it as primeval and at the source.