---
title: many indias, one bharata
sno: 79
---

Indian civilisation did not begin with the Holocene, nor did it end with the Mahābhārata. Several more layers are to be added after this, including- eventually- those that came to India from outside. So this is not really the end of the journey, but is a fair juncture to end *a* journey. We have in many ways arrived at the true end of an era. In some centuries after the Mahābhārata begin to arise names considered historical, leading finally to the likes of Buddha, Mahāvīra, Candragupta, Kautilya, Brahmadatta, Āryabhaṭa and more. This change-over represents the turning of India’s “past age” to “current age,” such that these names form our academic and legitimate history. Soon after, “India” begins to appear in Greek records and the European gaze finally dawns upon an ancient civilisation. But herein lies a fundamental problem in our civilisational felt-experience. JS Deepak’s recent book- India, That is Bharata- presents an articulate case for decoloniality, and its title asserts a truth recognised in our constitution. But what does it tell us, that in 2021 we still need such a book to assert the truth? There lies an existential rift in India- that of self-definition. It is easy to say that the rift is between India and Bhārata, but the truth goes a step deeper. The fundamental problem our nation faces is that not all Indians believe in the same nation. And a nation is exactly what its people believe it to be, so we see how problematic the matter is.

All of us believe in *India*, a constitutional democracy established in 1947 after a few centuries of British colonisation. This is the nation we are citizens of, the nation that grants us passports and levies taxes. The more ignorant in this category believe that India did not exist before 1947, or before the British taught our recent ancestors what a nation is. But while all of us believe in this India we are not in agreement on its definition. Some among us accept uncritically the adjective of *secular*, which was inserted into our constitution under a state of Emergency through the use of dictatorial powers. But all of us disagree, for a variety of reasons, on whether India today is truly secular, or even on the definition of secularism itself.

Then there’s a second India. Some of us believe in what, for the purposes of this book, we will refer to as *Hindustan*. A vast empire that was knit together by a series of foreign invaders of largely Turkic and Afghan lineage. Belief in this Hindustan is what split the India of 1947, and ironically the part cut away is today called Pakistan (with a five thousand year long history to boot!). Here too there are a variety of disagreements- many among us think of this Hindustan as centuries of foreign colonisation that embedded deep scars and trauma into our civilisation. Others turn a blind eye to this trauma and instead, with only some of them well-intentioned, speak of the great syncretism, harmony and secularism this Hindustan represents. In Anand Patwardhan’s documentary, Raam Ke Naam, he tells us of Babri Masjid’s “alleged” demolition. Those who believe that it is “alleged” are those who believe in this *Hindustan*. To them, the India of today is successor to a benevolent, epitomic and tehzeeb-daar Hindustan. What’s happening here is a psychosis in civilisational memory, a split-personality. Our conscious awareness would break down if there were rifts, discontinuities and ambiguities in our memory. Similarly does civilisational awareness break down if there are rifts, discontinuities and ambiguities in history. What is true really? That the centuries of Turkic/Afghani/Mongol colonisation of India was, on the whole, a positive experience that enriched India; or that it was as all foreign colonisations are and instead represents profound trauma? Since not all of us agree on how we remember this, it creates a divided India today.

And a few among us believe in what our constitution acknowledges- *Bhārata*- a unique and antique civilisation-state that has existed for indiscernible millennia. To those who don’t see it this way, our views reek of nationalism, fundamentalism, revisionism and even fascism. But as we have seen in the course of this book’s journey, Bhārata is simply the history that emerges when we stretch our civilisational memory as far back into the past as we possibly can. When we remember the early Deva-Asura conflicts, the Samudra Manthana, the revolution of Pṛthu, the origin of the pañcagaṇa, the problem of the Haihayas, the reigns of Bharata, Sagara, Rāma and more, and eventually our Great War- how do we not see the last one thousand years of our history for what they were- which is the wresting of our civilisational trajectory by foreign hands in all sorts of ways subtle and explicit? How do we not see *Hindustan* for what it was, and worry over *India* as it seems to manifest? More fundamentally, how do we not emerge with very different frameworks for our nation’s modern problems?

We may turn here to the kind of questions acknowledged in the introduction- what matters an antiquity and continuity to a nation so divided today? What matters to today’s Dalit that the ancient varṇas were not modern jātis? To the honour-killed girl that ours was once a society of gender equity? To even a student aspirant of a contemporary career, that ancient Indians possessed knowledge ahead of their times? And to answer these we may ask questions of a different kind- do ancient experiences of how we harmonised, how we assimilated and how we overcame internal differences not have salience if we find rifts within today? Should it not be emphasised that peaceful coexistence needs xenophobic religions to shed their baggage? Can a modern reality where oppression, stereotype-threat, class-divide and all problems therein exist not find solutions in a tradition *fractally* rich with *maṇḍalika* information on how to overcome group and/or individual misfortune? Should a modern population that needs to learn a foreign language to even begin absorbing ‘knowledge, literacy, education and employability’ be prevented from rooting itself to indigenous wisdom, expressed in indigenous epistemology and ontology?

The deepest tragedy here is that since readers are likely to be a mix of those that believe in *India, Hindustan* or *Bhārata*, the second set of questions above will not appear rhetorical to categorically two-thirds of the readership. Yet the point must be reiterated- we are talking here not of revisionism or fundamentalism but of repairing synaptic nerves. Of reconnecting to neural connections that have been severed and ruptured for centuries. Of simply remembering our past, our *full and entire* past, before we jump to articulate the problems of India today. Why would a 34 years-old person assess oneself only through their last 2 years, and why would a civilisation such as Bhārata dismiss its early several millennia and think that how it is today, is how it *always* was? Why would you, regardless of any present condition you’re in, allow another to dictate to you your memory, your faults, your experiences and your personality? Why should India, that is Bhārata, view itself only through the foreign lenses injected in the last thousand years and reiterated through “English-medium” education since Independence?

Again- these are rhetorical questions. And as a writer who has decolonised himself, in large parts, through understanding Bhāratīya history, I do believe the same can achieve decolonisation for others as well. You, the reader, I hope are among those others. And you, the reader, I hope, I have convinced of the validity of re-examining India’s past. I take it not personally if you disagree with much of my conclusions, or all of my temporal chronology. But on removing the colonised lens through which we have viewed our own civilisational felt-experience all these decades, and on the validity of Bhārata- the continuum of memory- I hope I have caused you to reassess. If not, perhaps the maps and genealogies that follow vivify my case a bit- and if not still- then perhaps you may commit yourself to the bibliography at the end. I am but a conduit of original research and thought so many people have produced, and they make the case far better than I might.

There is no consciousness without memory, and there is no civilisation without history. Consciousness is in fact the continuum of a stream of memory, and civilisation is in fact the continuum of a stream of history. This continuum, originating from the Early Indians who feature in the stories we’ve visited, through the Later Indians who have assiduously transmitted them, descends to us- the Modern Indians who inherit them. And since it is a continuum, what happens next depends on us. Will we continue it, or will we restrict ourselves to *India* such that *Hindustan* is a reglossed revision and *Bhārata* is a fundamentalist fantasy? The maņḍala is without a beginning, and without an end. What fractals would we, the Modern and Secular Indians, embed next? Shri Aurobindo wrote that “the human mind, in its progress, marches knowledge to knowledge, renews and enlarges previous knowledge- often obscured or overlaid, seizes on old imperfect clues and is led by them to new discoveries.” In our march to new discoveries, are we renewing and enlarging on previous knowledge, or do we march in dismissal of it?