---
title: marutta
sno: 52
---

The case of Marutta Āvikṣita is ambiguous for multiple reasons. For one, the name Marutta occurs twice- once in the Turvaśa line and one in the Vaiśālī line. Second, the Turvaśa Marutta had a father named Karandhama while the Vaiśālī Marutta had a grandfather named Karandhama, so there were two Karandhamas as well. Third, genealogies are vague for both the Turvaśa and Vaiśālī lines, and the latter is called so only in anticipation of Viśāla who appears much later in the timeline. We don’t even know what the Vaiśālī dynasty was called before Viśāla. The distinguishing evidence emerges from our cakravartin’s full name, Marutta Āvikṣita. The second is a patronymic, indicating his father was Avikṣita. This is fortunate, for there’s only one Avikṣita and he exists in the Vaiśālī line, and it allows us to conclude that there were indeed two Maruttas and Karandhamas.

Marutta’s dynasty descends from Manu directly, either through a son named Nābhānediṣṭa or Prāṁśu. We hear little of his ancestors in the early generations, but by the time the Haihayas rise to besiege Kāśī and Ayodhyā, Marutta’s ancestors are shown to be in conflict with Daitya and Gandharva tribes. It’s not outrageous to see this as an interaction period between Indo-Aryan, Sino-Burman, Austroasiatic and Dravidian language groups. Following Pargiter’s interpretation, the Vaiśālī dynasty could have been either the easternmost end of Indo-Aryan speakers, or the western fringe of Austroasiatic speakers. The Daityas they interacted with are likely to have been Dravidian speakers and the Gandharvas speakers of a proto-Sino-Burman. These are convenient divisions that have geographical validity, but must not be thought of in ethnic or racial terms.

By the era of Karandhama, Marutta’s grandfather, the Gangetic Plains lie prostrate before the Haihayas. First Bhadraśreṇya destroyed the Kāśī kingdom, then Arjuna brought an end to the Aikṣvāku one. A few generations after that Vitihotra Haihaya defeats Lauhi of Kanyākubja and ends the last great Gangetic kingdom. The Haihayas push further east and come into conflict with the Vaiśālī kingdom. It’s suggested that there’s aggression from the Vaiśālī side as well. Karandhama is an ambitious conqueror, bringing Daityas and Gandharvas under his sway before waging war against a conglomerate of kings based at Vidiśā. Vidiśā was no doubt a Haihaya city, likely a forward outpost for Haihaya raids into the Gangetic Plains. Karandhama is victorious in this encounter and a peace is negotiated, but his son is to create more trouble. The prince Avikṣit is portrayed as both a ladies man and a woman abductor. Not only is he chosen by princesses as their suitor at multiple svayaṁvaras, he abducts anyway those who reject him.

In one such instance he’s at the svayaṁvara of a princess of Vidīśā, possibly invited there after the peace struck by Karandhama. The princess rejects him and he carries her off anyway. This prompts a Haihaya retaliation and Avikṣit is captured. The ageing Karandhama must mount his forces yet again and go to war to reclaim his son, which he does. Descriptions of Karandhama’s enemies never mention Haihayas directly, but this is inferred through the synchronisms established in ancient genealogies. Haihayas are the only power strong enough at this period to be described the way Vidīśa’s conglomerate is, and we know that for generations they’ve been pushing east along the Gaṅgā. In perhaps an illustration of kṣatriya norms of the time, Avikṣit’s capture brings him shame and makes him ineligible for the throne. Thus the rule passes to Karandhama’s grandson, Marutta Āvikṣita.

Through Marutta come into the historical horizon the first named Āṅgirasas, though we known they existed even during Māndhātṛ’s era. In the past, Bṛhaspati is portrayed as a ṛṣi to Ādityas, but that too is at a later stage in their chronology. We’re told that Karandhama’s priest is Aṅgira himself, and that he has the sons Ucatya, Bṛhaspati and Saṁvarta. On becoming king Marutta petitions Bṛhaspati to be his royal priest, but the latter opts to officiate for Indra instead. Through the Himālaya close north of Vaiśālī, Marutta’s people are long in touch with surviving Āditya tribes. Either Āṅgirasas originated among Ādityas and migrated south towards Vaiśālī, or it happened in the converse direction. If the equation of Āṅgirasas with metallurgy innovators is correct, we should place the origins wherever we find better antecedents for developed metallurgy. On being denied by Bṛhaspati, Marutta approaches the younger Saṁvarta, who agrees to be his official priest. Ucatya fathers Dīrghatamās and Bṛhaspati fathers Bharadvāja. This is the first generation of Āṅgirasa ṛṣis, and several of their prayers will be compiled into the Ṛgveda.

Later in his life Dīrghatamās is set adrift the Gaṅgā and arrives downstream at the kingdom of Aṅga. This is a happy synchronism, for Aṅga is a descendant in the line of Titikṣu, an Ānava who migrated east, and his kingdom is placed around this time in eastern Bihar/northern West Bengal. Towards the end of his long life Dīrghatamās officiates the coronation of Bharata Dauṣyanti, and his nephew in Bharadvāja’s line is adopted by Bharata. This then is a critical pre-Vedic period. The Ṛgveda proper will emerge under the Bhārata dynasty, along the Sarasvatī river. But their spiritual preceptors, the Āṅgirasas, emerge to us in history first as aligned to Marutta’s Vaiśālī dynasty. Bṛhaspati is associated with Ādityas in the 6th manvantara as well, so there perhaps exists a sub-tribe of Āṅgirasas with long antiquity. But these happy synchronisms, if accepted as is, throw into question everything the Ṛgveda suggests about early Āṅgirasas and their royal contemporaries- an issue we discuss in Chapter 6.

Details on Marutta’s imperial exploits are scant, but we must assume that the combined work of three generations of Vaiśālī kings thwarted the Haihaya thrust into the Gangetic Plains. With Kanyākubja, Kāśī and Ayodhyā all defeated, it was Vaiśālī that finally imposed a resistance to the Haihayas and pushed them back at Vidīśā. Marutta also wages war on Nāgas, but since this is said to be in Pātāla we can only guess where that might have been. Nāga could be a generic name for a forest tribes found across India, and the Nāgas of Marutta could have been in modern Bangladesh and north-eastern India. Alternately, Marutta’s campaigns against Haihayas took him beyond Vidīśā all the way to modern Gujarat, where we know Nāgas resided at Kuśasthalī. This city in a few more centuries is taken by Yādavas and renamed Dvārakā, so we might wonder whether Marutta’s was the starting blow in Nāga downfall.

After centuries of devastating Haihaya raids, cakravartins such as Marutta would have been national heroes to the local populace. Bards would have sung great praises to them, stories would have been mythologised, impossibly long reigns or life spans assigned to the protagonists. These characteristics are present in Marutta. He appears in both the Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata. In the former his encounter with an iraivan is mythologised as an encounter with Rāvaṇa, and in the latter a store of gold hidden by Marutta is retrieved by the Pāṇḍavas. He features in stories alongside Śiva, Indra and other Devas, who by this time are no longer real human tribes. His reign is said to last for a thousand prosperous years- a hyperbole assigned to most cakravartins. He certainly installed an imperial dynasty that lasted many generations. The 39 generations between Manu and Marutta, in the Vaiśālī line, feature less than 15 names. Following Marutta however we have 21 successive names in the dynasty (a consistency commencing with his great-grandfather). His son Nariṣyanta and grandson Dama are also figures of Paurāṇika repute, and twelve generations later appears Viśāla in whose anticipation the dynasty is named. These generations alternate between marrying into and warring with the expanding Yādava and Haihaya tribes. The center of political power and civilisation in India will be further west for a long time, but more than two thousand years later it will return here under the Mauryan dynasty to establish the largest Indian empire yet. One cannot but marvel at the unparalleled continuity of human stories in India, at how deep the maṇḍala runs once you begin examining the fractals.