---
title: great indian matriarchs
sno: 24
---

To Svāyambhuva’s third daughter Prasūti, married to Dakṣa, were born the daughters Diti, Aditi and Danu. Their descendants are the first historical tribes of ancient India- Daityas, Ādityas and Dānavas. We’re told the names of twelve primary Ādityas- Aryamān, Dhātā, Tvaṣṭṛ, Pūṣāṇa, Vivasvān, Savitra, Mitra, Varuṇa, Aṁṣa, Bhaga, Viṣṇu and Śakra. Five thousand years later, Indians around the Sarasvatī would deify these names and call them Devas, the title of their leader being Indra. But in the intervening period these names and tribes existed as nomadic human tribes.

To Diti were born the sons Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa, along with a daughter named Simhikā. The latter’s descendants were called Saimhikeyas, and the sons’ dynasties we’ll soon explore. Danu had a hundred sons, and they in turn multiplied and spread far and wide. One son Vipracitti was married to Simhikā, and many others married into the Daitya tribes such that the two peoples eventually merged into one. These were the Asuras of Ṛgvedic times, but their historical tribes survived even to the Mahābhārata era as we will see. It helps to remember that not all human tribes progressed along the same civilisational trajectory. Some were settled and metallurgic even as others lived in Neolithic states. Some donned cotton attire while others continued to use animal skins, some adopted congenial urbanism while others remained belligerent scavengers.

Early India was populated by several other matriarchs. Dakṣa gave his daughters in marriage to many Prajāpatis, or people remembered as primary progenitors. One such Prajāpati was Dharma, and he married ten of Dakṣa’s daughters. Through the daughter Viśva were born Viśvadevas, through Sādhya the Sādhyas, through Marutvatī the Marutvats, through Bhānu the Bhānus and through Muhūrtā the Muhūrtās. These tribes disappear from Indian history early, but the Vāsus born to Vāsu survive in later eras. One Vāsu named Prabhāsa married Yogasiddhā, a sister of Bṛhaspati, and their son was Viśvakarman- the mythic architect of Daityas and Ādityas. Yogasiddhā, as her name suggests, was considered a foremost expert in yoga and esoteric knowledge. She is said to have migrated out of India, spreading yogic knowledge to the Far East. We may note in this context that the earliest datable maternal DNA in Japan is traced back to India.

Still other daughters of Dakṣa were married to Kaśyapa. To his wife Khasā were born Yakṣas and Rākṣasas- again actual tribes in earliest history. To Munī were born Apsarās and to Ariṣṭhā were born Gandharvas. To Vinatā were born Garuḍa and Aruṇa, and to Kadrū were born the Nāga tribes. All of them would be mythological to later Indians. These early tribes married into each other, adopted children from one tribe to another, and also waged several wars. The Purāṇas give us many hints on the kind of nomadic and Mesolithic lives they lived. We can even make guesses on geography, and speculate the locations of many mythological cities. But a mysterious figure of Indian mytho-history needs exploration before we move to those stories.