---
title: neolithic india
sno: 11
---

Early Neolithic cultures have been found at a number of sites in northern India. At Kile Ghul Mohammad in Balochistan, a pre-pottery culture has been dated to the 6th millennium BC. Less than 150 km south is the site of Mehrgarh, dated from the 7th millennium BC. At Mehrgarh we find the complete spectrum from handmade, plain pottery to painted, wheel-turned pottery, cultivated cereals, mud-brick houses and even cotton seeds. A kind of barley found at Mehrgarh requires irrigation to cultivate, leading us to wonder whether Mehrgarh had irrigated farming. The bricks used in Mehrgarh dwellings are in the ratio 4:2:1, the same which would manifest in mature SSC cities two thousand years later. This already is astonishing continuity, the kind that makes us pause to wonder. It has only been two thousand years since Christ today, but we’re talking of human settlements four times as old as that. By the 4th millennium BC Mehrgarh displays copper industrialisation, public granaries, town planning, fortified settlements and the division of a town into an upper part and a lower town. There is also evidence of turquoise, lapis lazuli and seashells- none of which are found close to Mehrgarh- indicating long distance trade.

Bhirrana in Haryana displays a similar spectrum and is dated to be as old as Mehrgarh, if not older. At the earliest stages, humans lived in underground dwelling pits coated with mud from the Sarasvatī alluvium. We find here mud-brick platforms with circular fire pits and hearths. Along with Rakhigarhi, Kunal, Banawali and a host of other sites in modern Haryana and Rajasthan, Bhirrana evidences that the SSC had an independent and continual development from Neolithic to Bronze Age, established primarily along the Sarasvatī river system. The brick ratios in Bhirrana were initially not in 4:2:1, unlike Mehrgarh and mature Harappan cities. But at Kunal with a parallel timeline we do find 4:2:1 ratios. This indicates that Neolithic Indians experimented with various brick and construction ratios. From the 8th to 5th millennia BC the Sarasvatī river system gave home to several rural settlements with similar characteristics in dwelling patterns, diet, farming and other cultural aspects. Early settlements at Kalibangan, Bhirrana, Rakhigarhi and other sites in modern Haryana and Rajasthan were part of this culture. Somewhat parallely, sites like Mehrgarh, Kot Diji and Rehman Dheri on the Sindhu were also on the path of civilisational progress.

Staubwasser and Weiss have shown that in around 6250 BC there was an extraordinary dip in global temperature that severely affected human populations in West, Central and Southeast Asia. Called the 8.2 Kilo-year Cooling Event, it’s reflected in a breach in site continuities, the abandonment of Neolithic sites, and new and re-settlements across the landscape. Lasting for four centuries, it would have caused widespread aridity and drying, thus impeding the development of agriculture. The radiocarbon dates for Bhirrana show that the cultural continuity breaks abruptly around 6500 BC, and is restored only five hundred years later. Breaks in continuity are found at sites like Mehrgarh as well, though not linked to the 8.2 Kilo-year Cooling Event. The archaeological landscape is of early settlements that were often abandoned due to natural disasters or other factors. In some cases new settlements came around them, in others they were resettled a few centuries later.

Advanced civilisation does not come about without a kind of ruling authority and social structure, but it’s unlikely that at the earliest stages Mehrgarh and Bhirrana were under one yoke. Even if they were in contact, there was little exchange of culture between them in the 8th to 4th millennia BC. This is an aspect we’ll explore in the story of Pṛthu Vainya. It appears that the Sarasvatī was settled first, and population spread further west to colonise the Sindhu and its tributaries. This is confirmed by Indian tradition where early rulers such as Nahuṣa and Yayāti expanded their kingdoms from the Gaṅgā to the Sarasvatī.

The 8th-6th millennia BC see the rise of early agrarian and metallurgic communities across Asia, and we can be sure of interactions between early Iranian and Indian farmers- a likelihood there are genetic findings to support. To their west those Iranians would have been in contact with Anatolians. While these areas emerge as early centers of settled living, to their north are all kinds of nomadic and pastoralist communities. For thousands of years these human populations interacted, exchanged language and culture, and migrated among different centers. Genetic data suggests an influx from Iran into India in the 6th millennium BC. This was previously linked to the spread of agriculture from west to east. But with the discovery of indigenously developed agriculture in India this situation is no longer possible. Even cattle domestication has deep roots in India, though husbandry of sheep and goat could have come from outside (likely the Tibetan Plateau). The genetic influx of the 6th millennium BC is not accompanied by any import of material culture or lifestyle. The 4th millennium BC is considered a period of transition. Major sites such as Bhirrana and Rakhigarhi move to a late Chalcolithic stage, and regionalisation and ruralisation of past millennia gives way to a kind of integration, which matures fully by the 3rd millennium BC. By 3000 BC cities like Mohenjodaro are well established, though their mature phase is a few centuries away.

Recent findings have also attested to early cultures in modern Uttar Pradesh. The fertile soil of the Gangetic Plains is poor in stony materials, and architecture here was long based on wood- which ages poorly in north Indian climate. This explains the lack of major architecture in this region in the 4th and 3rd millennia BC. But Lahuradewa near Gorakhpur in UP attests to an early farming culture in the 7th-6th millennia BC. A radiocarbon dating here for oryza sativa, or domesticated rice, yields a date of 6409 BC, which makes this the earliest confirmed location in the world for the domestication of rice. Continuity is evidenced at Lahuradewa from early Neolithic, through Chalcolithic to the Iron Age. A growing database of crop remains in the Gangetic Plains paints a picture of indigenous development of complex agriculture.

Pratapgarh near Prayagraj shows evidence of early Neolithic inhabitation since the 8th millennium BC, and the Chalcolithic age in the Gangetic Plains is attested from the 3rd millennium BC onwards. With pottery and farming antecedents from prior millennia, the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC Bronze Age culture here is called Ochre Coloured Pottery Culture (OCP), a name derived from the colour this culture’s pottery gave off on the hands of initial excavators. This culture was contemporaneous to the Harappan, and evidence mounts to consider it a full civilisation of its own. As we’ll see, both the similarities and differences between OCP and Harappan can be explained through Paurāṇika traditions. There’s also continuity between them. The 2nd millennium BC is taken as the Harappan civilisation’s late state. Sites like Mohenjodaro, Kot Diji, Dholavira and Ganweriwala are abandoned while sites around the upper Sarasvatī and Yamunā multiply. Here the late Harappan gives way to mature OCP, and tradition paints a scenario for this too.

Southern India at this time was going through a civilisational trajectory of its own, albeit slower than the one in the north. This is partly explained by the stark differences in geography. Northern India is a fertile plain watered by multiple rivers running across alluvium and vast tracts of habitable land. Cutting through Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Bengal are a series of mountains and dense forests that made navigation between the north and south extremely difficult in ancient eras, equally hindering cultural exchange. Further, most of southern India is a hilly plateau that yields arable land only near select deltas and the southern tip, playing a crucial role in civilisational trajectory. But as we will see, there are reasons to believe that Ṛgvedic tribes such as Yadus and Turvaśas might have been southern Indian in their origin. The Turvaśas are said to be ancestral to Pānḍyas, Colas and Ceras- mighty southern dynasties of later times. A recent study which need be investigated more suggests that wetland rice cultivation was being practiced in Sri Lanka as far back at 15000 BC! We also know that the Indian coastline extended further out during the last Ice Age ~12000 BC. Southern India’s civilisational artefacts might lie buried under the ocean, and its true history might be revealed from underwater explorations rather than surface archaeology. Tamil tradition hints at this, as we’ll later detail.

Some scholars have proposed that the genetic influx of the 6th millennium BC brought Dravidian languages and cultures into India, a conjecture not supported by any hard evidence but motivated by the same impulse to find foreign origins to Indian culture that underlines AIT. It was previously thought that Brahui in Balochistan was the remnant language of the Dravidian people as they migrated to southern India. But we know now that Brahui moved from southern India to north somewhere in 1000 AD. Another Dravidian language called Kurukh is found in Orissa, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and Bhutan. Since it’s most closely related to Brahui, we may speculate their migrations happened together. But even if Kurukh is older it proves no Dravidian journey from Iran to southern India. In any case, such a journey is imagined only to fabricate the picture of later Aryans invading a settled Dravidian populace. The reality is that Dravidian languages are indigenous to India and have deep antiquity. Further, they have a history of maritime dispersals from either side of India’s peninsular coastline.

As is done in the case of IE languages, Dravidian and the hypothetical proto-Dravidian are analysed to conclude the flora, fauna and geography of the proto-Dravidian homeland. To Dorian Fuller the lexicon is characteristic of the dry, deciduous forests of central and peninsular India. Franklin Southworth noted that the lexicon portrays a rural economy based on agriculture, animal husbandry and hunting. Some words indicated post-rural states such as trade and metallurgy. Asko Parpola identified Dravidians with the Indus Valley Civilisation and the early people of Gujarat/Saurashtra, but Witzel thought the IVC people spoke a kind of proto or para Munda. There are some truths to this. Dravidian languages were extant through southern and central India, well versed with the ocean and with maritime activities. Through ports in Gujarat they could have travelled both to Sindh/Balochistan and to the Middle East/Sumer. The SSC itself was a diverse, multilingual civilisation. It’s absurd to think that one language, one “religion” and one way of living characterised it entirely. The southern reaches of Sindhu and Sarasvatī may well have been dominated by Dravidian language speakers, and at least in the later period Ṛgvedic people were in contact with culturally aligned people from the south.

Southern India offers us interesting genetic implications. Lactase persistence (LP) is a trait evolved among humans where lactase enzymes are produced into adulthood. Since lactase is needed in the digestion of milk, and humans prehistorically only drank their mother’s milk, the body stops producing it in adulthood. Adult humans are generally lactose intolerant, but among some human populations a gene evolved through which lactase enzymes persisted into adulthood. Presumably, this happened first among human populations that began consuming the milk of other animals all through their life. While there are a few LP genes, the one that persists among humans of India, Middle East and Europe likely originated in southern India, somewhere between 12,000-13,000 years ago. This places the deep antiquity of cattle domestication in south India, a fact supported by the bos indicus evidence we discussed in the previous chapter.

Tamil Nadu experienced good climatic conditions between 9000-5000 BC. Animal husbandry and possibly rice cultivation triggered a population boom that pushed people north. Here they would come in contact with early Neolithic communities in places like Lahuradewa. This period would have had a high concentration of Neolithic and proto-agrarian sites in modern UP, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Assam. Deccan migration happened up the eastern coast first, reaching Nepal and Bhutan in its extreme end. The period experienced a strong Bay of Bengal monsoon that played a vital role in the rise of early agriculture in eastern India. We know that these migrations involved whole communities and not just elite males, for the journeys are found in mtDNA which is transmitted maternally. Some of these matrilineal lines have been found later in Russia, Nepal, China, Romania and Slovakia among other places. The mtDNA R30 and yDNA D2, which are prominent in Japan, both had their origins in India some 25,000 before the present. Clearly the ancient Indians had an incredible wanderlust, a proposition reputationists like to lampoon.

Northern and southern India are only convenient divisions that do not reflect any ethnic, religious, cultural or political clash. The diversity of ancient India went beyond IE and Dravidian speaking people, and contained an astonishing variety of tribes and communities in varying states of Neolithic existence. A number of Austroasiatic languages exist concentrated towards east India, from where they’re found across Southeast Asia. There’s evidence that for a long time proto-Austroasiatic speakers co-existed with proto-Indo-Aryan ones. Eastern Indo-Aryan languages display some features similar to Austroasiatic languages that are absent in western Indo-Aryan languages. Through modern Tibet and Bhutan these people were in touch with proto-Tibeto-Burman speakers, adding yet another layer of linguistic, ethnic and cultural diffusion. These speculations paint a picture that’s remarkably in sync with what Paurāṇika tradition hints of Indian history. It was realised in broad strokes by FE Pargiter nearly a century ago, but a complete explanation incorporating modern archaeology and genetics is possible only now.