---
title: prithu, adiraja, cakravartin
sno: 40
---

Veṇa’s cruel reign incites a rebellion among his people, and from his thigh the ṛṣis grind out a son named Pṛthu. It’s a theme that recurs throughout Indian history, where a disliked ruler is dethroned by a rebel ṛṣi alliance that chooses the next ruler. Though genealogies take the successor as a son of the dethroned, such incidents could well represent the installation of popular leaders when the incumbents lost tribal support. Pṛthu Vainya is born with a bow in his hand, donning a chain of metal armour. He’s the first kṣatriya and he’s dressed like it. He’s also the first rājā, called so because he brings ranj or prosperity to his people. He’s the first to conduct the rājasūya, ritual of coronation and the aśvamedha, ritual of conquest. In his time originate Niṣadhas, the riparian fishermen of ancient India, the Tuṣāras or Tocharians of Uttarakuru, and the Pitṛs under Yama who much later migrate to modern Iran. In Veṇa’s period the earth dries up. Trees disappear and rivers lay barren. Religious culture stands weak and the end of major Satya Yuga is nigh. Pṛthu resolves to change this.

He chases the earth to all corners, forcing it to yield itself to him and thus acquire the name Prithvī, Pṛthu’s daughter. There are signs of movement from a nomadic existence to a settled one. Before Pṛthu there were no towns and cities, no cultivated plants, no breeding of cattle, and no great shopping centers. But Pṛthu leads a civilisational change, the settlement of a people and the consolidation of culture. Everyone benefits from this. With the cow as a metaphor for the earth, the Mānavas yield milk and crop. To the ṛṣis this cow is soma, and their yield is penance or the knowledge thereof. The Devas take the cow as Indra and extract ojaskāra, or energy- a clear allusion to their aspiration to cling to former glory. Pitṛs, Nāgas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas and Gandharvas are all invited to participate, and each tribe takes something from Pṛthu’s prosperous reign. This is round two of the Samudra Manthana, except this time there’s a firm ruler in charge and the spoils are shared to everyone’s satisfaction. Our ancestors, by this time, were getting better at willing themselves into organic unity. The reformed earth contains mines, plants, farms, cities and towns. There’s gold and silver, milk and grain, soma and ritual. There are elephant cavalries and cattle ranches. The people now plough the land through all seasons, for the knowledge of irrigation has been gained. Great serpents beneath the earth that previously spewed venom and fire are tamed, for men have learnt primitive metallurgy.

Also born in this time are Sūta and Māgadha, to whom is assigned the job of chronicling it all. Sūta is to record the genealogy of Pṛthu and ensure it’s transmitted down the ages. Māgadha is to be his panegyrist, responsible for ensuring that the great reign of this Ādirājā, the first king, is not forgotten. Thus is born the ur-Purāṇa, the original nucleus at the heart of all Indian historical tradition. So pleased is Pṛthu with Sūta and Māgadha that he grants them kingdoms of their own. Māgadha gets the region he comes from (or the one that gets his name), and it’s at Magadha that Paurāṇika genealogies finally wrap themselves up and conclude their accounts. Sūta is given the land of Anūpa, corresponding to modern Balochistan (or possibly Gujarat) and indicating the extent of Pṛthu’s consolidation. No wonder that the Mahābhārata remembers Pṛthu as a cakravartin- a Supreme Monarch, a Mover of the Wheel of Time and Civilisation.

To those insistent on finding foreign origins to Indian civilisation, Pṛthu offers a route. His grandmother was a daughter of Yama, who is first among the tribe of Pitṛs. This ancestral association led later Indians to consider their own forebears as Pitṛs. Yama, Pitṛs and the tribe that derived its name from Pṛthu, the Pārthavas, are all placed in modern Iran. The Pārthavas are not only a proto-Iranian tribe in the Ṛgveda but appear as Iranian Parthians in Greek times. Was the first cakravartin of India an Iranian then? And does this mean that all of Indian civilisation has foreign roots? The answer of course is in the direction of migration implied by OIT. PIE culture originated in India and migrated west, such that when we speak of proto-Iranians we still speak of people placed within India.

Placed in around 6500 BC, Pṛthu is primely positioned as the monarch who plausibly established the first urban conglomerations of India- Mehrgarh and Bhirrana. Not that these were not previously settled, but that the layers that show planning, organisation and culture appear in the mid-7th millennium BC. Archaeology gives us nothing to link Mehrgarh and Bhirrana in this era, and they developed then in isolation. Either Pṛthu began from India and expanded towards Iran, or it was in the other direction. We previously thought that agriculture was introduced to India in the 7th millennium BC by Iranian agriculturists, a scenario that would have supported Pṛthu’s expansion from the west. But we now know that agriculture developed indigenously in India at multiple locations. If Pṛthu expanded from India, why do we find Yama, Pitṛs and Pārthavas in Iran while the dynastic link immediately died out in India? This is explained when we consider what happens to the dynasty after Pṛthu, which we’ll do in the next section.

For now, we can be safe in assuming that Pṛthu was an Indian monarch, reflected in the fact that even Ṛgvedic Indians called their realms Varāha Prithvīya and Nābha Prithvīya. At Mehrgarh he led a synthesis between Iranian agriculturalism and the civilisation radiating out from India- leading also to the genetic influx identified in Narasimhan et al’s paper. At Bhirrana he established a second capital (or it was his first), seeding the next nexus of Indian civilisation. The influx of DNA into India in this period can be explained by the wave of migrants that followed Pṛthu’s expansion. George Driem argues that contrary to popular perception, agricultural centers attract population instead of radiating it out. If so, it explains why Indian civilisation invited a genetic influx in this era.

In any case, the borders between Iran and India are very recent. For thousands of years they’ve been fluid and the greater Indian cultural sphere included all of Jambūdvīpa. Pṛthu’s nominal descendants, the Pārthavas, would later be found in Iran. They could represent Renfrew’s PIE dispersal events or Bomhard’s Nostratic origins, or some kind of pre/post scenario in between. With Pṛthu onsets the major Tretā Yuga circa 6500 BC. The age of Gods and Demons is on decline and the descendants of Manu have established a vast civilisation. And yet true history is still a few generations away. Another decay is needed to reset time, and a new wave of progenitors and culture movers will bring about the 7th and current manvantara of Indian history. Pṛthu appears in the Ṛgveda as composer of RV 10-148, a hymn dedicated to Indra. Book 10 of the Ṛgveda is likely the latest of all books, its hymns representing a wide range of periods probably modified to later dialects. Pṛthu’s hymn is a standard hymn praising Indra and asking for his help, it gives us next to nothing about the mind or milieu of the man.