---
title: proto bharatavarsha
sno: 66
---

2500 BC is the high tide of mature Sindhu-Sarasvatī civilisation. All the elements we associate with civilisation- writing, long-distance trade, town-planning, advanced agriculture, architecture and metallurgy are in place. Beginning from the south, Lothal and Dholavira are important port cities, trading with places in Mesopotamia and Arabia. Dvārakā also likely exists, but we restrict ourselves here to archaeologically attested SSC cities of the time. To their northwest in modern Rajasthan, Ahar and Balathal are in full-fledged Bronze Age. North along the Sindhu are mature, fortified towns such as Amri, Chanhu Daro, Mohenjodaro and Kot Diji. Between 2800-2400 BC these lower Sindhu sites show conflagration levels, or evidence of large and destructive fires.

Moving north we reach the nexus of civilisation, modern Haryana and greater Punjab. Here the mature SSC is in full bloom at Ganweriwala, Ganeshwar, Kalibangan, Harappa, Bhirrana and Rakhigarhi to name only a few of the major sites- which otherwise run into hundreds. The civilisation reaches as north as Burazom in J&K, and in total it covers a territory larger than the contemporary Egyptian and Mesopotamian civilisations combined. Craniological analysis at sites like Mohenjodaro shows presence of Australoid, Mediterranean, Mongoloid and Alpinoid types, attesting to the civilisation’s cosmopolitan nature. It was, as archaeologist KN Dikshit puts it, “*evidently (the) meeting ground of people from all of Asia*.” Mohenjodaro was a vasati of Paurāṇika tradition, a cosmopolitan settlement abundant with traders and businessmen from all over.

Notable articles of diet found are beef, mutton, pork, sesamus, poultry, gharial, turtle, tortoise and fish. Medicines included śilājīt, cuttle-fish bone, deer horn, coral and neem- all elements prescribed in Āyurveda. The svāstika designs of SSC have been found on seals as far as Crete and Turkey. Three burial patterns have been identified. A full burial was evidently conducted for those who died of natural causes and late in life. Others were buried after partial exposure to animals or birds, and some (usually children) were cremated before burial. This too is evidence of a multi-cultural society. Other cultural artefacts include bronze vessels, gold jewellery, terracotta and bronze figurines, toys, dice and games.

This vast civilisation has ancestry of many thousands of years. Genetically it’s been largely undisturbed since at least the 7th millennium BC, and the genes are anyway fundamentally native to India since 65,000 BP. The forefathers of those who people it now were original innovators of agriculture, animal domestication and metallurgy. There is no reason not to consider the same for wheeled transport, architecture, town-planning, basic sciences and other elements of society. There are undoubtedly sūtas singing in Harappa and māgadhas eulogising in Mohenjodaro. We might even know these places by other names. Sivipuri’s geography and chronology is remarkably close to Harappa, and if not Mohenjodaro then Kot Diji could have been called Rorukā. Kalibangan might have been Nāgadhanvana, and a case can be made that the first Hastināpura was Rakhigarhi. Through Nausharo/Mehrgarh at Bolan Pass and Rehman Dheri near Khyber Pass, these ancient Indians traded with civilisations to their west, not to mention thriving maritime trade through Dholavira and Lothal. In the north, sprawling through modern Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan was the BMAC, a culture with close ties to the SSC.

The Indus script remains an enigma, or at least consensus has not been reached for its decipherment. A consensus decipherment could force the rewriting of countless books on Indian history, including this one. But when the weight of current archaeological, linguistic and textual evidence is honestly considered, it appears less likely that ‘indigenists’ and ‘revisionists’ will have to revise their works. Contemporary to the SSC, proto-OCP develops under the Sāgara dynasty as we outlined in the previous chapter, which also shed light on southern India during the same period. We should not rule out the superiority of southern Indians in maritime affairs, and their possible contributions to trade not only from Lothal and Dholavira but also from India’s eastern coastline. Archaeological evidence for this in the 3rd millennium is lacking in southern India, but the situation may not always remain so.

Political impetus for civilisation comes from the Sāgara dynasty first, which itself is a reaction to imperial ambitions of the Haihayas. For the SSC this is a regionalisation era, when different areas develop under the organisation of federated Ānavas and Pūrus, with Druhyus on their western periphery, Aikṣvakus on the eastern and Yādava-Turvaśas on the southern. All native Indian cultures, they provide valuable cultural impetus to SSC. The names above represent primary dynasties of Indian tradition, but they should not be confused to mean all Indians. Tradition remembers the political powers well due to its sūta-māgadha customs, but Indian civilisation was formed by a variety of people as diverse as we should expect for India in any age.

Around a century before Sudās, Rāma Dāśarathi forms the largest empire known to India yet, and it’s a mix of imperial conquest and federal alliances that stretch from the Gangetic Plains in the north to the tip of southern India, thrusting into Rajasthan and Gujarat in the west. This brings a new wave of ṛṣis into contact with the Bhāratas of Sarasvatī-Dṛṣadvatī, and with the Ānavas the Aikṣvākus establish marital contacts. The Bhāratas themselves have emerged from relative obscurity, claiming lineage to the ancient Pūrus who once ruled these lands. Hereditarism descends in their brāhmaṇa lines first, and the rulers appear to be meritocratic/democratic appointees, setting legacy for the sabha and samiti system of the Ṛgveda.

But the rise of dynasty is inevitable, and by the time of Divodāsa Bhārata in 2700 BC the Bhāratas set out to establish empire proper. For the SSC this triggers the integration era, the period when localised cultures will be yoked into what we call the Mature Harappan civilisation, and this happens under a brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya conglomerate starring Āṅgirasas, Vāsiṣṭhas and Vaiśvāmitras- who found Ṛgvedic culture as we know it. Divodāsa focuses within the kingdom first. He strikes an alliance with the Ānavas in Punjab and Kashmir. Integration commences between Sothi-Siswal and Ravi-Phase, and a commonality of culture begins to spread from Rakhigarhi to Rehman Dheri. Then he turns to the rude tribes within the country. By ‘rude’ we mean any number of forest, mountain, hill and cave tribes that hindered the progress of urban civilisation, and the label should be viewed without any racial colours. In Divodāsa’s era their leader is represented by Śaṁbara, and the latter’s association with Daśaratha tells us that this is happening along the Gaṅgā too. Enemies at this stage could also include fledgling villages and towns, those that resist joining the integration wave.

A few generations after Divodāsa comes Sudās in 2500 BC, the most prolific conqueror of his dynasty yet. His is the era of final integration, of the emergence of Mature Harappan. He possibly takes care of filial rivals first, dominating the competing lines of Ajamīḍha’s other sons. Then he pushes northwest, dispersing Ānava and allied tribes from their ancestral homelands. The borders of proto-Bhāratavarṣa are taken to the Khyber Pass, which he crosses and stretches the empire to modern Afghanistan (a good fence with a good neighbour). This will remain Bhāratavarṣa’s northwestern border for millennia to come. South on the Sindhu he puts Mohenjodaro and Kot Diji under siege, their inhabitants likely fleeing after the cities are burnt by Sudās’ forces. Proto-Bhāratavarṣa now extends down the Sindhu, where it meets with the maritime Yādavas and their culture- itself in exchange both with the Gaṅgā and south of the Narmadā. It precipitates a coalescence between SSC and OCP, where Rāma’s empire meets Sudās’ and forms a proto-Bhāratavarṣa that begins to look something like its later shape. On the Yamunā he battles yet more belligerent tribes and emerges victorious, pushing empire to include all of Pāñcāla and the Carmaṇavatī and Vetravatī rivers.

The borders of empire thus set, he lays the grounds for civilisational stability. A final treaty is negotiated with tribes both east and west of Sarasvatī, and it’s agreed that different people will retain their autonomy while submitting to the larger banner of Bhāratavarṣa. What’s left incomplete by him is finished by his descendants Sahadeva and Somaka. They extend (the federated) empire up to the Bolan Pass in Balochistan, again establishing a boundary that will last thousands of years. The Iranians remember this event as the formative years of Airan and Tuiran. For us, Tuiran is proto-Bhāratavarṣa, and we call it proto only because there’s no evidence of this name in the Ṛgveda. But the antecedents have become apparent. Sahadeva also brokers peace with the Yādavas and Turvaśas, no doubt building atop previous cultural pathways established under Rāma. Already the map of modern India is near unified, and soon to arrive on the scene are the people who will explicitly use the word Bhāratavarṣa. Calling themselves the Kurus, they existed 4,000 years before the British came here and created India. It’s why our Constitution declares that we are “India, that is Bhārata.”

The one perplexing lacuna in this narrative is the complete absence of Sudās from Paurāṇika tradition, which otherwise well remembers not only many kings but sixteen cakravartins. Why would a man instrumental in the formation of proto-Bhāratavarṣa be so excluded from its historical traditions? The answer lies in understanding Paurāṇika and royal continuity. Sudās’ campaigns bring damage to the line of Saṁvaraṇa, from whom descend the Kuru-Pāñcālas. It’s these people under whom the base Vedic and Paurāṇika tradition is established. They have no compunction in exalting the ritual tradition inherited from their Tṛtsu cousins- the Vedas- but their dynastic grudge ensures the erasure of Divodāsa and Sudās from historical memory. This is why they’ll continue to think of themselves as Bhāratas and call their land Bhāratavarṣa, for they have affinity for all that preceded them, except the one dynasty that brought defeat to their own patriarch. As the Kauravas rise we see a break in the North Pāñcāla genealogy, indicating that the dynasty did extract its revenge. In any case, their own royalty and its war(s) will give much content to the history of Bhāratavarṣa, and we must remember that the Vedas are only instruments of sound to Indian tradition- never an account of history.