---
title: rama dasharathi
sno: 58
---

Dilīpa II and his Kosala kingdom flourish in the generations consequent. Old alliances last well, and for a while no new rivalries emerge. To the east are the kingdoms of Kāśī, with whom Ayodhyā has close marital relations; Videha, ruled by Janaka Aikṣvākus; Vaiśālī, with whom relations are distant and Aṅga, also a friendly kingdom. The immediate west and south-west is occupied by Yādavas, again a closely allied tribe since Sagara’s era. There is familiarity with the distant north-west, where the Ānava kingdoms of Kekaya and Madra will soon become Aikṣvāku in-laws. A curiosity lies in the immediate west, where in Sāgara dynasty stories we hear nothing of the parallel Bhārata dynasty and vice versa, sans a few exceptions we’ll discuss. It’s certainly interesting that two of ancient India’s most prominent dynasties, critical in the rise of mature SSC and OCP, seem more or less unaware of each other. But it appears that this could be a case similar to what first appeared for Harappan vs. Vedic- separate initially but with many layers of overlap, different fractals in the same maṇḍala. A few explanations for this will be discussed in the next chapter. Let us also remember that there’s no particular reason for Vālmīki, speaking of Rāma’s years of exile and wandering in southern India, to make mention of fire-worshipping inhabitants of the Sarasvatī; or for these fire-worshippers to include in their mantras a historical reference to those living in Ayodhyā, deep in the Gangetic forests and far from the Sarasvatī.

Dilīpa II is succeeded to the throne by his son Raghu, who’s followed by Ajā and then Nemi. Raghu is best known through Kalidāsa’s Raghuvaṁṣa, a text composed at least 2,500 years after its titular protagonist. While the Purāṇas are reticent on Raghu, they and the Epics often refer to Rāma as Rāghava, or descendent of Raghu. New patronymics frequently arise in a dynasty as long running as the Aikṣvākus. Raghu’s father was also called Ailāvilā, or son of Ilavilā. The emergence of a new patronymic indicates that its source committed memorable deeds in his lifetime, such that Rāma prided in being Rāghava, apart from Ailāvilā or Aikṣvāku. Similar trends occur in the Pūru line too, as we’ll see. After Dilīpa’s unification of the Kosala kingdom, it seems that the next few generations turn their attention north and to the forest areas within their realm. Raghu battles against Indra, and both Ajā and Nemi battle Rākṣasas. Such names are by now general titles that urban cultures use for tribes residing in forests, mountains, caves etc. or for tribes that retain a pre-urban Neolithic state.

As a young king Nemi wages war with Śaṁbara, an Asura king who also features in the Ṛgveda. He’s helped in this by his allies from Kekaya, an Ānava kingdom, where seemingly the women fight on the frontlines as well. This is at odds with Ṛgvedic evidence. Ṛgvedic Divodāsa also battles Śaṁbara, who as a Dasyu is to be associated with Ānavas. But in the Rāmāyaṇa, Ānavas help Nemi against Śaṁbara. Nemi is injured in battle and a Kekayan princess comes to his aid. With her as his charioteer he takes to battle again, and legend tells us that so ferocious is his onslaught that he appears to fight in ten directions at once. This earns him the title by which he’s better known, Daśaratha. Chariots have been discovered in India at Sinauli dated to 1900 BC. Given archaeological convention, a discovery of 1900 BC makes us assume that chariots could have existed from at least two centuries prior. This brings chariots to within three centuries’ reach of Daśaratha, or more likely just another archaeological discovery away.

In other words, we begin to reach a period in Indian history where actual chariots are no longer implausible, and we need not posit a foreign import for this. Even the word nemi refers to the felly of a chariot wheel, and in this form it occurs in multiple instances in the Ṛgveda. Enamoured by Kaikeyī, the princess who saved him, Daśaratha takes her home as his second wife. As an even younger king, Daśaratha earned for himself a curse from two grieving parents, whose son Śravaṇa he mistakenly killed during a hunting trip. The curse is that in his time of need, when he wants his sons around him, Daśaratha will be devoid of their presence. He will die without them, just as Śravaṇa’s parents did without their son.

Back in Ayodhyā, Daśaratha rules as a prosperous and popular king with one major lacuna- he has no heirs. From his first wife Kausalyā a daughter is born- Śāntā. This daughter is adopted by Lomapāda, the king of Aṅga and Daśaratha’s childhood friend. She’s married to a ṛṣi named Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, a Kāśyapa. Such interactions inform us on the connections between different tribes and kingdoms in ancient India. The continuing search for a son leads Daśaratha to bring home a third wife, Sumitrā. He eventually approaches the royal guru Vasiṣṭha for counsel, and through a mythological stratagem conceived by Ṛṣyaśṛṅga four sons are born. To Kausalyā is born Rāma the eldest, to Kaikeyī is born Bharata, and to Sumitrā the twins Lakṣmaṇa and Śatrughna. The princes grow up in amity in Ayodhyā, and over time Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa bond more as Śatrughna gravitates towards Bharata.

2600 BC falls in a period of high civilisation in ancient India. On the Sindhu and Sarasvatī the SSC is in full bloom. The Indus script is widespread, towns like Harappa and Mohenjodaro are at their most populated, and long distance trade takes Indian products as far as Sumer and Sogdiana. In Uttar Pradesh, after millennia of irrigated cultivation of rice, lentils and other seeds, barley cultivation appears at sites like Lahuradewa and Jhusi. This expansion of agriculture necessarily implies other things- 1) increase in population and density in the Gangetic Plains, 2) increased deforestation as land is cleared for cultivation and new settlements spring up, securing the area from predators and other tribes, 3) gradual dislocation of the others- Rākṣasas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Asuras. This can be traced from several centuries ago, when rulers like Sagara had to reclaim their kingdoms not just from Haihayas but also from Rākṣasas that occupied Ayodhyā.

That the conflict is ongoing is evident from Dilīpa’s attack at Alakāpuri, or Raghu’s war with Indra, or Daśaratha’s with Śaṁbara. But the battlegrounds are now further away, the main Kosala kingdom secure. It helps that Kāśī’s a stable kingdom with peaceful relations, and that from the west expand the Pāñcāla Bhāratas we detail in the next chapter. In the next few centuries the expanding OCP of the Sāgaras will encounter the SSC of the Bhāratas along the upper Yamunā, and a commonality will develop among the two, precipitated in no less part by the ṛṣi school they share- Vāsiṣṭhas. Copper is found in the OCP towards the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC, including the finds of copper hoards frequently associated with OCP cultures. 2600 BC in Uttar Pradesh therefore is still a pre or nascent Chalcolithic phase, and this is evidenced in the weapons technology of Rāma’s era. There are no swords yet nor metal armour, but there’s a cornucopia of maces, spears, lances, javelins, bows and slingshots.

A Viśvāmitra appears at Daśaratha’s court when the princes are young to ask for aid in dealing with a tribe of Rākṣasas. Historically placing the many Viśvāmitras and Vasiṣṭhas of Indian literature is a task both frustrating and engaging. This Viśvāmitra requests for the eldest prince to help him, and Rāma is accompanied by the now inseparable Lakṣmaṇa. Viśvāmitra’s need displays another aspect of civilisational conflicts of the era. He’s frequently hindered in his yajñas by Rākṣasas that emerge from the forest and defile his rituals. But what could this mean historically? The Purāṇas give elaborate details on the process to make a land fit for settlement, agriculture and other purposes. We get the picture that the ancient process of clearing land involved a ritual practice that made it ‘pure’ from its ‘wild’ past. Remember that the Purāṇas also considered humankind a domesticated species. It stands to reason that it considered humans of the forest, like the animals in them, wild species. When land had to be cleared for domestic settlement it necessarily had to be freed from wild humans. The opposite implication is equally true. Wild predators would be attracted to human settlements with their availability of cattle, chicken and other easy prey. As would pre-urban Neolithic tribes be tempted to raid the wealth of settled farmers, cowherds and tradesmen. The exchange was not always of conflict though. Economic and cultural contact existed with tribes such as Niṣadha and the Bhils.

Two speculations emerge from Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa’s adventure with Viśvāmitra, the latter more fanciful than the former. We’re told that the ṛṣi imparts to them the powers of bala and atibala, and the knowledge of astra and śastra. Our present age conditioning makes us dismiss these as fanciful myths, but let’s be realistic about what this could and could not mean. We may well begin with asserting that no supernatural powers or missiles were imparted by Viśvāmitra. But we also should acknowledge modern attestations of humans who withstand extreme climate or push the limits of sustenance and performance in various ways. Our bodies are capable of an extremely wide spectrum, of which we occupy but a small section. Of course two young boys would not have developed the abilities overnight, but if at all they acquired any knowledge it stands to reason that it came from a ṛṣi of Viśvāmitra’s lineage. It lines up further that the ṛṣi possessed astra and śastra too, for the original Viśvāmitra was of kṣatriya lineage.

The second speculation is only a thought on ways that the same thing could be remembered by different people. Sometime before Rāma’s era, Divodāsa Bhārata was expanding his kingdom from North Pāñcāla. We detail the story in the next chapter, but here we note- Divodāsa battled a Dāsa by the name Śaṁbara, like Rāma’s father did, and his expansions would have brought him to the greater Punjab region, maternally related to Aikṣvākus since Daśaratha’s marriage to Kaikeyī, and possibly from the ancient era of Māndhātṛ. Finally, Bhārata legends remember two Aikṣvākus by the names Purukutsa and Trasadasyu. We’ve seen from the section on Māndhātṛ that confusion exists across literature on the genealogy and chronological placement of his direct descendants. Perhaps for Bhāratas in Punjab the memory of these two names existed, and when new Aikṣvākus came into their horizon they used existing epithets. This is not too surprising. Nemi himself was remembered by a different, war-time name by his people- Daśaratha. That a people would remember figures of a distant tribe by war-time epithets that carried through the ages is equally likely. It’s the same reason why we’re told that Raghu fought an Indra, though around the same time Bhāratas had already mythologised the latter name in their hymns. We may well wonder whether titles such as Trasadasyu and Purukutsa were, at least in some parts of the Ṛgveda, referring to the likes of Daśaratha and Rāma.

This speculation admittedly has no support from literature, and in any case the Rākṣasas that Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa fight turn towards southern India for aid. In the Pāla forest they battle Mārīca, Subāhu and Tāṭakā, of which the first is uncle to a powerful iraivan in the south. Subāhu and Tāṭakā are killed by the Aikṣvāku princes while Mārīca flees. Under a priori thinking, it’s tempting to see in this Aryan vs. Dravidian colours, though they exist not. This is a period in India where three broad civilisation centers radiate out, each of a different nature and at somewhat different technological states. And each center is itself of a multi-ethnic, possibly multi-linguistic nature. One center is on the Sindhu-Sarasvatī, arguably the foremost on material technology and well into the Bronze Age. Another is on the Gaṅgā, still in early Chalcolithic and its eastern cultural limit extending far into modern Assam and Nagaland. The third, the one we have least archaeological data for, and the one where said data likely lies buried under the ocean, was at the tip of the Indian peninsula. Prior to the Holocene, with lower sea levels, Sri Lanka would have been joined to the tip, and together Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Sri Lanka would have made for the most arable land in south India. As mentioned earlier, an unconfirmed report has found evidence of rice cultivation in Sri Lanka dating to 15000 BC. Even the Rāmāyaṇa, as we’ll see, describes Laṅkā as nothing short of a civilisational high seat.

And none of these three high seats give any evidence of being homogenous ethnically, culturally or linguistically. The Viṣṇu that Rāma will later by mythologised as in northern India is already a spiritual figure in the south, along with Mahābali, Prahlāda and Śiva from the past ages. Rāma’s forthcoming journey to the south opens a long period of interaction through which southern concepts, already well refined, of mūrti-pūjā, bhaktī and temple-architecture will travel north, eventually spreading all over India and merging amicably with local traditions. In turn Rāma’s Gangetic culture, long-rooted in Himalayan wisdom and an inner-gaze, the same that later births Buddha and Mahāvīra, brings a philosophical and psychological personal ethic that quickly catches on among the forest and plateau tribes of southern India. As the first to embody that ethic, Rāma himself becomes a proto-Buddha to them. It’s not for nothing that Rāma’s first and most loyal devotee is the Hanūmān we soon visit.

Victorious in Pāla forest, the brothers are taken by Viśvāmitra to Videha, the ancient seat of Janaka kings where the current Janaka, Sīradhvaja, holds a svayaṁvara for his eldest daughter, Sītā. On the way they come upon the āśrama of ṛṣi Gautama, which is in fact an indirect appearance of Rāma in Ṛgvedic history. This Gautama is the descendant of Dīrghatamās, and his sons Vāmadeva and Nodhā are prominent Ṛgvedic composers. His wife Ahalyā is the sister of Divodāsa Bhārata, who in turn is a kind of protagonist figure to book 6 of the Ṛgveda. That Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa could be Purukutsa and Trasadasyu is fanciful speculation, but that they lived during the Ṛgvedic period and came within its geographic sphere is confirmed from the above synchronisms. Let us add that the son of Divodāsa, Pratardana, is said to have been present at Rāma’s coronation.

The short end of Sītā’s svayaṁvara is that the four Aikṣvāku princes are married to four Janaka princesses. Rāma marries Sīta, Lakṣmaṇa marries Ūrmilā, and the remaining two Aikṣvākus are married to Sītā’s cousins. Life appears idyllic for a while in Ayodhyā, where Rāma enjoys popular support and Daśaratha gears to hand the reigns of empire to his eldest son. Legend tells us that two incidents from Daśaratha’s life now return to haunt him- the curse of Śravaṇa’s grieving parents, and the boon Daśaratha granted to Kaikeyī for saving his life. The second wife desires for her son to take the throne after the king, and demands that Daśaratha exile Rāma and declare Bharata the king. The Rāmāyaṇa that we know is an exploration of Dharma through the life of a historic figure. To what extent the historical Rāma was like his mythological personality is a matter for eternal debate, but that negates not a bit the validity of Rāmāyaṇa’s dhārmika exploration. Unlike civilisation on the Sindu-Sarasvatī, the Gangetic Plains have witnessed many generations of monarchy and conflict. Great cakravartins such as Yayāti, Māndhātṛ, Sagara, Marutta and Arjuna have shed blood here, weaving a history of rule, domination and kingdom-building. It’s a multi-ethnic, multi-linguistic hotspot with many millennia of settlement- Mānava, Daitya, Āditya, Dānava, Nāga, Rākṣasa, Yakṣa and other tribes in overlapping layers of Indo-Aryan, Dravidian, Sino-Tibetan and Austroasiatic linguistic coexistence. There are questions being asked here that have not arisen in the rest of India.

How should a king rule? What is right for him and what is not? What values should he embody? What character? Who should he trust and who must he suspect? Who is an ally and who an enemy? What kinds of war to wage, and when to do so? How to treat the defeated, and how to treat the populace? How to accumulate wealth and how to distribute it? And beyond all of this and more- how to live life? How to be of value to society? How to be moral and decent? How to treat others, and how to treat authority? Whether or not Rāma was a veritable maryādā puruṣottama, his life was inspiration enough for the epic to be built. From Kaikeyī’s demand begins the life proper of a man who seemingly dedicated himself to Dharma, to doing exactly as he ought to given his stature, responsibility and privilege in society. Daśaratha himself appears disinclined to exile his eldest son, and even Ayodhyā’s populace is distraught at the idea. But it’s Rāma who resolves that a king’s word and honour are sacrosanct. Regardless of Daśaratha’s or anyone else’s feelings on the matter a promise had been made to Kaikeyī, one for saving Daśaratha’s life no less. If the king of Ayodhyā could renege on such a commitment for personal sentiment, then no bigger dishonour to kingly duty could exist. It’s thus Rāma, with the temperance and humility that define his life, who volunteers himself into exile at the desire of his stepmother.

He’s not alone in such commitment to doing the right thing. Sītā is offended at the very idea that Rāma would have her stay back in comfort while her husband’s pushed off into exile. She insists, not without argument between them, that she’ll accompany him wherever he goes. She’s a proud woman with agency throughout the Rāmāyaṇa. Said to be no less educated than Rāma in both veda and archery, and though she occupies in the Epic a damsel-in-distress position (reductively speaking) she continually defies the archetype. Unable to be separated from his dear stepbrother, Lakṣmaṇa forsakes his wife Ūrmilā and also takes to the forest with Rāma. And here begins in earnest the Rāma Ayaṇa, or Rama’s Journey.

Taking their blessings from Ayodhyan elders, the trio depart and first arrive at Pratiṣṭhāna, the ancient capital of Yayāti which is now called Prayāga. Daśaratha breathes his last on the sons’ departure, and given that his other two sons are away on military campaigns he dies just as cursed by Śravaṇa’s parents. At Prayāga Rāma pays respect to a ṛṣi Bharadvāja, confirming again that on the Yamunā and to its west are many Āṅgirasa ṛṣi clans. Beyond Prayāga they come upon the forest of Citrakūṭa, placed in modern Madhya Pradesh 120 kms west of Prayagraj, where they make their first camp. An aspect of Rāma’s definition of exile emerges in both the direction of his travel and the eventual reach. To his east, as far as the Gaṅgā was known, was the friendly kingdom of Aṅga. To the west were the Yādavas, maritally aligned many generations over. On the north-west, even if they went as far as modern Punjab they’d encounter the friendly kingdom of Kekaya. True exile meant exiting the broader cultural and political sphere, it meant entering into lands truly foreign. Thus Rāma’s path takes him through central India towards lands and people he’s entirely unfamiliar with.

At Citrakūṭa they are visited by Bharata, who absolutely refuses to take the throne that belongs to his elder brother. Despite his plea Rāma is unmoved, for the word given by his late father has to be upheld. Bharata returns but takes a vow of his own. He places Rāma’s sandals at the throne in Ayodhyā and retires to an āśrama called Nandīgrāma, a site 20 kms south of modern Ayodhya known as Bharatkund even today. For the next fourteen years he will live in a self-imposed exile, retreating into an ascetic existence that will make him unrecognisable to his own brothers when they finally meet again. This too is an exploration of Dharma. Bharata is presented to us as an embodiment of loyal brotherhood, his refusal to occupy what was rightfully Rāma’s an example of upholding state law. But equally does his asceticism push the kingdom into neglect, forcing the Vasiṣṭha ṛṣi and Daśaratha’s widowed wives to act as regents. It’s left for us to judge whether Bharata’s decision was truly warranted, or whether he needed to push himself to such asceticism to make his point. He certainly lived up to *a* code of Dharma, but did he uphold his kingly Dharma- as he was supposed to in the circumstances?

In Citrakūṭa the group is visited by the first inkling of the dangers ahead. Sītā’s abducted by a Rākṣasa named Virādha, and Rāma slays him to reclaim his wife. They journey south of the Vindhyās brings them into the Daṇḍaka forest, a vast jungle that once covered portions of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa. Its southern limits were defined by the Kṛṣṇā river, and to the east it ranged till the Godāvarī’s mouth. This is not virgin land of course. Humans have lived here since the Paleolithic, and some Purāṇas maintain that the original sovereigns of Daṇḍaka descended from Daṇḍa, a son of Vaivasvat Manu. Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa and Sītā move from āśrama to āśrama for a while before they reach the āśrama of an Agastya ṛṣi, where they first hear of a powerful iraivan in the south. An ambitious monarch, this iraivan’s been expanding his territory ever northwards, and some of his cousins have a kingdom south of the āśrama. Rāma goes on and finally reaches the Godāvarī’s southern bank, the janmabhūmi of most of his life’s sorrows. They make their camp here at Pañcavaṭī in modern Nasik, and here they will stay for the next thirteen years.

The troubles start with a Rākṣasi named Śūrpaṇakhā first. She appears enamoured with Rāma and propositions him, and on being declined does the same with Lakṣmaṇa. Many an analysis has been conducted on the casteist/sexist/gender/elitist implications of what follows. We’re told that on repeated propositioning on Śūrpaṇakhā’s part, and finally an attempt to abduct Sītā, Lakṣmaṇa cuts off her ears, breasts and nose- a brutal punishment by any measure if true, and an implication of brutality nonetheless if hyperbolic. It shows us that even the noble Aikṣvākus held one standard for their own people, and another for those outside their fold. Rules of conduct and morality applied to the in-group, but for the out-group one could act amorally. To avenge this punishment appear Śūrpaṇakhā’s cousins Khara, Dūṣaṇa and Triśiras, who Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa defeat. Numbers throw up historical implausibilities here. We’re told the Aikṣvāku brothers battle huge Rākṣasa armies, but even if they took on small warrior bands they would have faced clans of 15-20 people at least. We could assume a degree of martial and technological superiority, but there comes a point beyond which three people (including Sītā) cannot take on multiple enemies.

Either they were accompanied by some kind of Aikṣvāku retinue throughout their life which protected and aided them in exile- a suggestion not found in text anywhere. Or their tale is merged with past memories of Sāgara-Yādava-Haihaya battles with southern Indian iraivans- a possibility more likely ever since Arjuna Kārtavīrya’s battle with an iraivan along the Narmadā. Much like the victories of countless Āditya leaders were attributed to Mahāviṣṇu, and those of many generations of Aikṣvāku and Kāśī kings to Rāma Jāmadagneya, the many Sāgara-Yādava-Haihaya victories were attributed to Rāma Dāśarathi. This is how layers of history nest into each other and take the form of mythology, the resolution getting increasingly blurred as a present age becomes the past. Extracting true itihāsa from Indian tradition demands of us such realistic re-evaluations of text.

This defeat at Rāma’s hands forces Śūrpaṇakhā to go to her cousin, a powerful iraivan in Laṅkā by the name Daśagrīva. To northern India then and to the modern world he is better known by the name Rāvaṇa. This is likely not the first time Rāvaṇa hears of northern Indian royalty and tribes. Himself a follower of Śiva, Mahābali and Mahāviṣṇu alike, he’s as versed both in history and religious knowledge as any scholar of the north. Though his seat is at Laṅkā, there’s evidence he’s federally aligned to kingdoms as far north as Janasthāna near the Vindhyās. Laṅkā is no civilisational weakling either. As a prehistoric seat of technology, language and ethnicity it possesses antiquity and continuity to rival any ancient center in the north. It was no doubt a maritime power as well, giving it trade with if not military reach over India’s eastern coastline, Andaman and Nicobar, the Malayan coastline and the Indonesian islands. Of the countless iraivans unknown to history, and among those that appear momentarily, Daśagrīva is poised to be immortalised as the definitive Rāvaṇa.

Thus Rāvaṇa engages in a time-honoured tradition, though we euphemise something that was undoubtedly horrible for the victims- wife-abduction. It was done by Indra to Hiraṇyakaśipu’s own wife, and eras later by Soma to Bṛhaspati’s wife Tārā, both times triggering a Daitya-Āditya war. History is set to recur, and Rāma embarks on a search for his kidnapped wife. A lesson in inter-tribal relations is served to us in his visit to the settlement of Śabarī, a Niṣadha woman who feeds him and his brother. She advises them to find a vānara named Sugrīva beyond the Pampā river, a powerful ruler who can help him find Sītā. Sometime during this journey they encounter Jaṭāyu, an old friend of Daśaratha who tried to stop Rāvaṇa and was fatally injured in the process. Elements such as the vānaras and bird-kings like Jaṭāyu make us wonder what’s historical and what mythological in the Rāmāyaṇa. Clearly half-man half-birds have never been real, and no kind of tailed-primate has ever achieved human-like sapience. An easy way to breakdown vānara would be vana + nara, or forest-man. But the Niṣadhas were a forest tribe too and were never referred to as vānara, so northern Indians were not unfamiliar with forest humans. Knowing that Sagara and his descendants have been familiar with Vidarbha and the Godāvarī for at least five centuries, it’s also difficult to argue that Rāma’s is the first encounter of mānava and vānara tribes.

The conclusion we’re left with is that some tribes continued to exist in a Mesolithic or early Neolithic state- their tribal totems dedicated to eagles, snakes and primates, their garb formed with animal skins and leather, their attire consisting of lithic ornaments and their ritualism of a nature mystic and esoteric to urban folk. In time there emerged differences in diet and lifestyle so stark that they engendered taboo and stigma, anthropologically understandable even if morally abhorrent to modern sensibilities. Jain tradition considers vānaras a clan of supernatural beings called vidyādharas, whose flags bear the emblem of a monkey. Men among the Sora people in modern Orissa, an ethnic Munda tribe, wear a loincloth hanging from the back which can be mistaken by strangers for a tail. Whatever the historical reality, vānaras were not militarily or culturally unsophisticated. Whether as vānaras or as vidyādharas they are presented as people of great wisdom, strength and moral fortitude.

Concerned at the northern Indian strangers entering his realm, Sugrīva deputes his minister Hanūmān to ascertain if they’re friends or foes. Hanūmān meets them in disguise first, learning their intent and of the abduction of Sītā. The Rāmāyaṇa from here on paints a picture of growing devotion on Hanūmān’s part for the serene yet determined personality of Rāma. A negotiation is struck between the princes of Ayodhyā and the vānara leader Sugrīva. Rāma is to help gain the kingdom of Kiṣkindhā from Bāli, Sugrīva’s elder brother. In return Sugrīva and his vānaras will help get Sītā back. True to its nature as a work of dhārmika exploration, the Rāmāyaṇa allows its audience room to judge Rāma’s morality in the killing of Bāli, which happens not without a bit of deception. Sugrīva challenges Bāli to an open duel, during which Rāma kills the latter with an arrow from a distance. This element of political pragmatism finds greater echo in the Mahābhārata, where everyone acts amorally and more expedient towards political goals. Here Rāma does the same, and the killing of Bāli is a collateral in the larger cause of getting Sītā back, which cannot happen without vānara help. A curiosity also emerges in the technological difference between vānaras and Aikṣvākus. If getting rid of Sugrīva was as simple as shooting an arrow from behind a tree, surely Hanūmān or any of Sugrīva’s other aides could have done the deed. Perhaps this indicates to us that vānara tribes of the Deccan plateaus and forests were at this stage without the bow and arrow.

As the new ruler of Kiṣkindhā, Sugrīva makes true his promise and sends vānaras looking for Sītā in all four directions. The story takes us south with Hanūmān, where he first comes upon an abandoned Daitya city named Caturāsya. Further south he meets a relative of Jaṭāyu named Sampati, who both confirms that Sītā’s been carried to Laṅkā and that he cannot help owing to a peace treaty with Rāvaṇa. A fanciful tale follows of Hanūmān making it to Laṅkā in a few great leaps, though in reality it was likely through a crude but effective canoe. At Laṅkā he meets Sītā and spies on the great kingdom, eventually being captured and brought to court by Indrajit, Rāvaṇa’s son. The name is curious too, for which Indra was it that this Rākṣasa battled and defeated? It confirms to us either that the title Indra was widespread in India from prehistoric times, or that Rāvaṇa’s prior campaigns took him north along India’s eastern coast to modern Bengal and Sikkim, or both.

Rāvaṇa is intent on putting the vānara spy to death, but is persuaded against this by his brother Vibhīṣaṇa, who later quits Laṅkā and joins Rāma’s side. Hanūmān returns to Kiṣkindhā with the news- Sītā is at Laṅkā and awaits Rāma’s arrival to reclaim her. Thus are amassed the forces of war, and the vast vānara army is brought to the tip of the Indian peninsula, where Rāma pays homage to Varuṇa (not to Indra, Soma or Agni- primary deities of the Bhāratas at this time) and builds his famed bridge. At Laṅkā Rāma sends a final emissary to Rāvaṇa, but war is inevitable. We see here that it’s Rāvaṇa’s army that’s superior. His forces have arrows, spears, maces and elephants while the vānaras fight with nails, teeth and stones. It’s a clear case of a prosperous, Chalcolithic fortress being attacked by a relatively primitive, Neolithic people led by a set of royal archers. The end of a long and devastating battle of course is the defeat of Rāvaṇa and the triumph once again of good over evil, a theme recurrent in Indian tradition through Hiraṇyakṣa-Varāha, Hiraṇyakaśipu-Narasiṁha, Indra-Vṛtra and Paraśurāma-Kārtavīrya to name a few.

An uncomfortable truth lies in Sītā and Rāma’s first reunion after the victory. Rāma looks to his wife with suspicion, and she with pride subjects herself to an agni-parīkṣā to prove her chastity. Various retellings have tried to reconfigure this in a way that absolves Rāma of the obvious truth- he was human and displayed the male insecurity that proves it so. Equally does it indicate a changed socio-cultural paradigm. When we started at India of the post-Holocene, Hiraṇyakaśipu’s wife was abducted by an Indra, but that created no problems among them in the fatherhood of Prahlāda. In the consequent generations children were often born to fathers other than those married to their mothers, and Hiraṇyakṣa adopted Andhaka of a different tribe altogether. But more than seven thousand years have elapsed since then, the urban dynasties and tribes of 2600 BC a very different entity to the nomadic Indians of 9000 BC. Times have been changing ever since Bṛhaspati’s assertion of ownership over Tārā’s womb, but the son that was born was named after his biological father and received commensurate social status. Rāma is born to a more possessive world, one where concerns of male ownership, property and lineage are paramount. We may judge him accordingly of course, his tale invites all angles of dhārmika inquiry.

Vibhīṣaṇa is installed at the throne of Laṅkā, and with fourteen years having elapsed it’s time for Rāma to finally return home. Ayodhyā is no stranger to the return of victorious kings, having done it grandly for Sagara six centuries ago. The roads are dusted and sprinkled with liquid sandal, lanes furnished abundant with flowers. Flags of various colours hang from all buildings and the horses and elephants are painted bright. The music of lutes and drums welcomes the rightful king and queen, sūtas and māgadhas happily weaving their tale already. Rāma visits Nandīgrāma first of course, where neither he nor Lakṣmaṇa recognise their brother Bharata, now in a state of emaciated asceticism. Then they reach Ayodhyā at last, where after being welcomed by the mothers Rāma is crowned the new king. In modern consciousness Rāma’s story only has one epilogue left- the later banishment of Sītā owing to the comments of a washerman. Concerned that his citizens doubt the queen’s chastity, and that this in turn would throw his heir’s claims into doubt, Rāma exiles Sītā who goes on to reside at ṛṣi Vālmīki’s āśrama. Here are born the sons Lava and Kuśa, who years later encounter Rāma’s aśvamedha horse and are reunited with their father. But in the tale of his aśvamedha lies what is arguably Rāma’s true historicity- that of an empire-builder, a cakravartin. The Rāmāyaṇa technically ends with Rāma’s victory over Rāvaṇa, but his career as an emperor has just begun.

Rāma is well aware of both history and legacy. He knows of his ancient progenitor Māndhātṛ, and of the recent kings Sagara and Bhagīratha. Desirous of no less fame than these ancestors he embarks on a career of empire building. On this campaign it’s Bharata who accompanies him, while Lakṣmaṇa stays back to take care of the kingdom. They first visit Bharata’s maternal kingdom, Kekaya, where Bharata’s sons reside with their maternal uncles. It’s possible that this is the period when the cities of Takṣaśilā and Puṣkalāvatī are established (modern Taxila and Peshawar), and once again we’re forced to notice that even in going west the Aikṣvākus seem to skip the entire Sarasvatī belt. One possibility is that Kekaya and Madra at this stage already belong to Bhāratas and not to Ānavas, such that Kaikeyī is a Bhārata princes. It explains why of all the personalities in Aikṣvāku genealogy, it’s the son of Kaikeyī who receives the name Bharata. In all of the Rāmāyaṇa, when the lead figures are in Kekaya or Madra, they are among Ṛgvedic Bhāratas. This again is speculation alone.

Then the brothers turn south and recreate Rāma’s original journey beyond the Vindhyās. They visit Sugrīva at Kiṣkindhā, where Rāma is made uncomfortable at questions on Sītā’s absence. Then Laṅkā is visited, where a trade pact is struck with Vibhīṣaṇa. In some versions the latter expresses concern that Laṅkā might attract northern invaders following Rāma’s story, so Rāma picks up his bow and destroys the bridge his army built. It’s clear that much like Sagara’s journey south six centuries ago, Rāma reaffirms federal alliances as part of consolidating his kingdom. On his return Vibhīṣaṇa hands him a mūrti of Vāmana, an avatāra of Mahāviṣṇu- showing to us the migration of mūrti-pūjā and consecration from southern to northern India. That in some centuries Rāma himself will be added to the string Vāmana belongs to- of Mahāviṣṇu’s avatāras- shows how different layers are embedded into the same maṇḍala.

The fourth brother Śatrughna has not kept himself idle all this while. Ranging west of Prayāga he’s battles the Rākṣasa named Lavaṇa and establishes a city named Madhurāpurī along the Yamunā. Here we are met with the intangibility of ethnic divisions in ancient India. Lavaṇa is in fact a Yādava descendant, and he’s a Rākṣasa to the Aikṣvākus only in a moral sense- not ethnic. Many generations hence the Yādavas will reclaim the city and rename it Mathurā- where Rāma’s spiritual successor, Kṛṣṇa, will be born. On their return Rāma and Bharata go to Madhurāpurī first, bringing both tribute and the Vāmana-mūrti from the south. By some accounts the mūrti is consecrated at Madhurāpurī, while others have it established at Kanyākubja. The former seems more likely, for the latter at this stage would have been under the Pāñcāla Bhāratas. This federal affirmation done, Rāma’s conquest begins in earnest. A grand aśvamedha is organised, and the lead horse is put under direction of Śatrughna and Bharata’s younger son, Puṣkala. Also accompanying them are veterans of Rāma’s army, Hanūmān and Jāmbavān. Ranging north first, the horse goes through Pāñcāla territory and reaches Ahikṣetra (near modern Bareilly), then under the reign of north Pāñcāli king Sampada. Sampada submits to Ayodhyā’s banner, and we can be sure that no expansion is made further northwest when we see the horse turn south next.

Crossing the Vindhyās it reaches north of the Daṇḍaka forest in the territory of Vidarbha, occupied by the maritally related Yādavas. Here they find a town rife with the smoke of both domestic and sacrificial fire, sacrificial posts, hermitages, wild rice and cows with huge udders. Around the settlement, within Daṇḍakāraṇya, are lions and black antelopes. It’s a description not too far from that of small mature-Harappan towns along the lower Sindhu and Sarasvatī. Ranging ever south the horse conquers a vast territory, Śatrughna and Puṣkala battling local kings such as Vimala, Subāhu, Vidyunmālin, Vīramaṇi, Vīrabhadra and more. The last of these kills Puṣkala and forces Rāma to enter the war and bring it to a decisive end. A full circle is made that turns east along the Godāvarī and reaches the eastern coastline, from where they go northwards to the kingdom of king Campaka in modern Orissa. A tribe named the Śailūṣas here have long been enemies of Ayodhyā, and they are made to submit to Rāma’s banner.

Finally the horse reaches the āśrama of a ṛṣi named Vālmīki, where the young archers Lava and Kuśa put tough resistance to Rāma’s forces. Following a long battle where Lava, Kuśa and even Lakṣmaṇa are almost killed, the true identities of all are revealed. Father is united with sons and a grand kingdom is ready to be carried forward. Having been presided by Vasiṣṭha, Kaṇva and Vālmīki ṛṣis, the aśvamedha has wide priestly approval. In some versions the twin sons help their cousins in Kekaya first, where they establish the settlements of Lavapurī (Lahore) and Kuśāvaṭī (in Kashmir)- perhaps as part of an ongoing conflict between Bhāratas and Ānavas. Other versions ignore this part and say that Kuśa gets the main seat at Ayodhyā while Lava establishes himself in north Kosala at Śrāvastī. Lakṣmaṇa retires to a hermitage he builds on the Gomatī’s banks, called Lakṣmaṇapurī (now Lucknow). Rāma’s long reign and his conquests establish a kingdom rich with crops, wealth and fields. The subjects are morally good and self-abiding. There’s ample grass, cows, temples, villages and flowers. Women are of amorous ways but the society is not wayward in sex, and slavery of any kind is non-existent. A knowledge of herbs and medicines prevails, and the king rules with a just hand under the counsel of wise ṛṣis.

From a political and cakravatin point of view then, Rāma and Sītā’s story is but a small part of a larger tale. Quite like Aragorn in Tolkein’s Lord of the Rings, even in exile Rāma serves the political needs of his kingdom by making friends (vānaras) and defeating competition (Rākṣasas) while helping wizards (ṛṣis) clear the land for new settlements. And as king he clearly presides over a conquest of massive proportions. The conquests under Śatrughna and Puṣkala are mentioned as a single aśvamedha campaign, but even as a singular endeavour it’s likely to have lasted many years. From Gujarat in the west to Orissa in the east the kingdom of Kosala expanded its dominion during Rāma’s era, and even if Sītā’s abduction precipitated the invasion of Laṅkā, it was invaded nonetheless, the incumbent ruler dethroned, and a friendly ruler installed in his place. Accounting for the range of these conquests, taking aligned states such as Kiṣkindhā and Laṅkā to be a part of the kingdom, and ignoring blank spots within the kingdom still occupied by unallied tribes, Rāma’s ‘kingdom’ will be outsized only more than two millennia later by Candragupta Maurya.

It forms the definitive dispersal event for OCP culture. OCP artefacts found in Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh attest to cultural dispersals under Rāma’s reign to Yādava, Rākṣasa and Pāñcāla territories. Expanding to modern Ahar and Balathal in Rajasthan, it would come in contact with a flourishing copper industry and be propelled towards true Bronze Age, a technological condition that brings it at par with SSC by the end of the 3rd millennium BC. The same culture has been found as far as Orissa and the Chhota Nagpur plateau, confirming that contact was rampant between kingdoms such as Kosala and Kaliṅga. It could also be the final militarising and technological impetus for southern India, such that tribes erstwhile vānara and Niṣadha upgrade their weapons, tools and lifestyles through increased contact with settled tribes. With Rāma’s reign ends the minor Tretā Yuga and a Dvāpara begins, a sign that it ushered in a period of all-round progress and prosperity, no doubt propelled by a parallel wave under the Bhāratas of the Sarasvatī.

In Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa, Rāma appears not just as a maryādā puruṣottam but also a figure of deep tragedy. While we can read many things in the text, to Vālmīki his protagonist was a man who always did what was right, regardless of his personal feelings on the matter. Despite what life threw at him- an exile, a war with strange allies in foreign lands, the abduction of his beloved and her later exile, and finally even the near-death of his own sons at his army’s hands- Rāma took it all with fortitude and acted only as a king must. But he grieves internally throughout, even for Sītā all his life, and in some versions of the tale late in life he commits suicide by drowning himself in the Sarayū. This isn’t the suicide of a man in the prime of his life, tired of it, but the willing death of an old man who’s given his all and needs nothing more from life- the kind that will be espoused by the Jain philosophy that’s birthed in Rāma’s lands.

His position as a cakravartin-par-excellence is equally clear, and at the end of his long aśvamedha he advises Lakṣmaṇa on the qualities of a king. A king should acquire wealth only by rightful means, develop it, guard it, and give it to the deserving. He should possess humility in statesmanship, knowledge of the scriptures and control of his senses. He must contain fortitude, dexterity, proficiency, reticence, energy, eloquence, generosity, endurance, amity, truthfulness, good conduct and self-control. He must denounce lust, anger, greed, delight, pride and arrogance. He should abstain from causing injury to living beings, be courteous in speech and show compassion to all. A poor man in anger can kill the king, so a king must be doubly sure to keep the least privileged in his kingdom happy. He should guard to his best ability the seven parts of a kingdom- king, ministry, territory, fortress, treasury, army and allies. Ministers should be native to the country and at least a few spies should be from foreign lands. The kingdom itself should have good crops and plenty of water, sacred sites, wildlife and water courses independent of rains. The sermon runs long, listing not only the kinds of kingdoms but the kinds of allies, enemies, treaties and war. When to conduct what treaty and when to conduct war, how to motivate an armed force, and when to negotiate peace with an enemy- all these and more Rāma teaches Lakṣmaṇa.

Arguably no other human tale has seen as many retellings as that of Rāma. It’s no exaggeration to say that there are hundreds of Rāmāyaṇas, and in a few Sītā is even his sister! In the 15th century AD a dynasty in as far as Thailand called its capital Ayutthaya and styled itself as descended from Rāma, and Muslim Indonesia to this day considers Rāma a figure of great myth and history. For every virtue attributed to him, a different retelling insists on the converse. Southern Indian retellings (admittedly many thousand years later) portray Rāma as quite the charmer, and are not prudish in suggesting his many dalliances with forest lasses, though these could have conflated accounts of Rāma with those of Kṛṣṇa and presented them within a local morality. But every retelling of the Rāmāyaṇa, every new interpretation of his personality and fresh evaluation of his sexism are a new fractal on an eternal maṇḍala. Whether a Mahāviṣṇu really incarnates in human forms, of which Rāma was one, is a matter of faith. But whether a Rāma-like figure ever struck out from the Gangetic Plains and established a vast empire that facilitated cultural fusion in ancient India is undoubted. Millennia later even the Buddha would claim to be of the same lineage.

Archaeological excavations at modern Ayodhya have yielded evidence of continual inhabitation since at least 1500 BC, and at the Ram Janmabhoomi since around the 5th century BC. Buddhist tradition holds that the early Aikṣvāku capital was named Sāketa, and though some hold this was the same as Ayodhyā it could have been an earlier site. Perhaps Sāketa was Rāma’s Ayodhyā, the site shifting over a few centuries as the Sarayū’s course changed. Perhaps only the known location of Ram Janmabhoomi was forgotten such that it shifted over time, and the modern Ayodhya will yet yield evidence of inhabitation in the 3rd millennium BC. This will not be too surprising of course, for Lahuradewa only 100 kms to the east was already inhabited since at least 7000 BC. The question isn’t whether it’s possible for Rāma’s Ayodhyā to be remembered as long as it has been, it’s whether any proof will ever be enough to those who dismiss Indian tradition as ahistorical. To such a mindset nothing about Rāma will ever be true, but for thousands of years it has been to countless million people as far as Indonesia. Rāma’s history is imprinted deep across India. It isn’t only a group of people in Uttar Pradesh who believe he exiled in Pañcavaṭī for example- the same has consistently been remembered in the memories of people around modern Nasik.

The Aikṣvāku dynasty fades from history in the generations after Rāma, though his descendant Bṛhadbala fights in the Mahābhārata war. The political power instead shifts to another dynasty that’s been on the rise since Sagara’s time, one that will eventually come to conquer the entire Gangetic Plains up to modern West Bengal before precipitating the greatest war of Indian history. The dynasty was seeded centuries ago by Rāma’s own ancestor Māndhātṛ, through his destruction of the Pūru lineages. But some time around the rise of Sagara, the Pūrus had commenced rebuilding their ancient dynasty.