---
title: rantideva sankrti
sno: 62
---

Rantideva, son of Saṅkṛti, has little to offer to us in terms of political history. Instead he can help resolve a peculiar knot, not only of Indian history but also the present. The issue is of beef, both of what to do with it today and what was made of it in the past. Did the ancient Indians eat beef? Did they prescribe it? Is it provable that Ṛgvedic Indians ate beef, or that Aikṣvāku kings did? Rantideva helps answer this, because works such as Beef in Ancient India by Raja Rajendralala Mitra and The History and Culture of the Indian People by RC Majumdar claim that Rantideva slaughtered 2,000 cattle for consumption on a daily basis. It’s further asserted that the river Carmaṇavatī received its name from the daily emission of carmaṇa, or combination of cow hide, offal and viscera, released from Rantideva’s palace.

Let’s assess the problem without Rantideva first. Archaeological excavations across India reveal that our ancestors consumed a variety of meat products, both domestic and wild. Analysis of faunal remains in the Gangetic Plains at sites like Jhusi, Kohildwa and Lahuradewa shows that Mesolithic, Neolithic and Chalcolithic Indians consumed cattle, sheep, goat as well as wolf, fox and deer. Faunal remains of bos indicus, the Indian zebu cow, are as ubiquitous as those of bubalus bubalis, the water buffalo. We need not be moralistic about this. Ancient humans across the planet at first had little qualms with consuming flesh, initially even raw. The journey from meat consumption to abstinence clearly involves the development of both ethic and privilege. In the modern world, humans prosperous enough to own dogs as pets develop an aversion to the idea of eating dog-meat, even as they consume factory-bred meat of animals no less sentient than dogs.

In ancient India prosperity came through cattle first, specifically the cow. Like dogs in the modern world, the ancient Indian cow was a part of the household. But the relationship went deeper, for the cow was a provider of milk, like one’s own mother. Ahiṁsā was specifically an injunction of non-violence towards animals in Indian tradition, before Gandhi expanded it to one of global humanism. And the injunction of non-violence towards animals was first a sensitivity specific to the cow, venerated as mother. Vedic tradition consistently refers to cow and buffalo both as aghnya, or inviolable. Not all who cohabited with cows developed this ethic of course, just like some in China consume dog-meat while others own them with filial affection.

An honest reading of Vedic literature makes clear its great value for animal life, and its specific usage of ahiṁsā as a principle of non-violence to animals. Yet attempts abound to find evidence for beef consumption or cow slaughter in the Ṛgveda. For example, a claim is made that RV 6-17-1 has Indra consume the meat of cow, calf, horse and buffalo. One can only wonder how such translations are arrived at. The specific line is:

*pibā somam abhi yam ugra tarda ūrvaṃ gavyam mahi gṛṇāna indra*

Griffith translates this as “*Drink soma, mighty one, for which, when lauded, thou breakest through the cattle-stall, o Indra*” while Jamison-Brereton favour “*Drink the soma! The cattle enclosure that you will drill through to, mighty Indra, when you are greatly sung*.” Neither finds any hint of meat consumption! Similarly, it’s claimed that Yajñavalkya in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa confesses a preference for tender beef at SB 3-1-2-21. This hinges on two words in the concerned verse- dhenvanaḍuh and aṁsala- translated as ‘meat of cows and buffalos’ and ‘tender’ respectively by Macdonell and Keith in their definitive Vedic Index. It seems to indicate that, in SB 3-1-2-21, ṛṣi Yajñavalkya is wont to consume the tender meat of cattle.

But dhenvanaḍuh is the compound of two words, dhenu and anaḍuh. These mean, respectively, the product from cows (milk) and from buffalos (farm products, through their labour). Similarly, the word aṁsala is translated by Pāṇini and in the Amarakośa as ‘nourishing, strength bestowing.’ What Yajñavalkya is saying in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa is that, since he’s not a householder, the usual injunction of fasting before a yajña does not apply to him. Instead, to keep himself nourished, he can partake in some light, tender product such as milk-sweet or rice-pudding before the ritual. This is his preference for aṁsala dhenvanaḍuh.

Let’s concede that one Yajñavalkya might even have preferred tender meat. How do stray instances outweigh the larger ethic prevalent in Vedic literature? These examples show that any number of claims can be made for beef consumption, but each is demonstrably false when the matter is researched to conclusion. In fact, when archaeological evidence shows that Indians consumed meat of all variety including beef, why do we need such false claims at all? And why is all of this important? The answer is threefold:

- Concerns over Hindu ‘extremism’, which seeks to impose a particular dietary preference over all of India. In extreme form it might even justify criminal vigilantism.
- An impetus for Hindu denigration, which for centuries has undermined all traditions Hindu and is untiring in its effort to negate everything Hinduism considers sacred. Modern Indian liberals, who take their dogs out for regular walks and balk at the idea of dog-meat consumption in China, are apparently unable to fathom the Hindu’s veneration for the cow!
- The need for a modern playbook, a way forward for India on issues of beef and meat consumption.

The first problem, as a manifest reality, is of recent genesis. Cow slaughter is prohibited in the Indian Constitution, but with India as one of the world’s largest exporters of leather this issue has not really created vigilantism problems until now. The second problem, an impetus instead, proves its motivations by fabricating evidence of beef consumption in Vedic literature when archaeological evidence of such exists in India anyway. We need not undermine Hindu ethics to admit archaeological realities, yet some would have it so. The third problem of course is why these things are important, for what is modern India to do if it inherits a legacy of ahiṁsā with special, or aghnya, status for cattle?

Resolving this requires honesty both intellectual and cultural. There’s a world of difference between modern factory-farming of meat on one hand, and the faunal subsistence of self-sustaining communities on the other. Our desire for culinary tolerance need not be a call to open our nation to assembly lines of cattle cages, rows of mutilated cows hung on hooks and truckloads of bovine meat being transferred to the grills of the latest Burger King. In an era where we consider whether to confer human rights on dolphins and chimpanzees, India need not be ashamed of its legacy for ahiṁsā, or non-injury to animals. Neither need we apologise for aghnya, or the special accord we give to cows, in a world which easily understands why humans attach to dogs on one hand and consume hotdogs on the other. Dogs are an accepted part of the modern human family, cows were a part of the ancient Indian household. It explains the origin of the term gotra, which initially possessed no hereditary angle. The early ṛṣis, propagators of cow-veneration, all maintained cow-pens which were tended to by their disciples. Disciples of the same cow-pen were bonded for life into a gotra.

This need not whitewash the hypocrisies of modern civilisation. Anyone can be made cynical when we see how modern India treats its cows, or our flourishing leather industries. What’s needed is a balance in views, and it should be okay for cattle or meat to be part of the diet for modern Indians, given that they always have been, without a flourishing industry built on cattle slaughter. There’s something exceptionally morbid in the thought of a modern cattle-slaughter farm existing at a place where an ancient ṛṣi might have tended to his cows with great love and affection. Insofar as Hinduism’s formal structure is found in Vedic literature, the verdict is clear- harm to animals is prohibited and the cow is especially sacred. But given that the Vedic is one strand of Hinduism, it cannot be imposed on those who come to Hinduism from different angles. A middle ground exists which allows India’s populace its varied dietary choices, our country a leading space in the world’s march towards greater respect for animal life, and a stable law-and-order situation which allows no space for criminal vigilantism of any kind. On this middle ground we need not undermine Vedic/Hindu value systems, nor claim that Rantideva slaughtered thousands of cattle, when the only thing the poor Bhārata is actually famous for is his enormous donations of cows!

This detour has taken us away from the main thread of the book, for the above discussion can soon turn political once historical realities are established. But the detour was always necessary, for at some point in the narrative we had to ask ourselves what the ancient Indians ate. The answers from archaeology are what should be expected- the faunal diet was as varied as the floral. Ancient India was peopled by hundreds of tribes, countless among which emerged and disappeared like bubbles. There was immense diversity even among those that tradition remembers, and literature presents only a select few as protagonists. For these protagonists of Indian tradition, not only was non-injury to animals an evolved value, a king was supposed to actively maintain the wildlife of his kingdom. The concepts of ahiṁsā (animal-agnostic) and aghnya (cattle-specific) pervade Vedic literature, and even the seals of SSC indicate that the humped bull carried sacred value. Many an ancient Indian royal undoubtedly hunted the antelope and roasted the buffalo, but when names such as these do appear they are denounced by the ṛṣis. Untold tribes that joined the Hindu fold through other shared values would have continued their faunal subsistence, without it hindering their membership, just as it shouldn’t today. After all, Daśaratha received a curse early in his life while he was out hunting. But then, it’s his son we venerate and remember, not him.