---
title: sagara aikshvaku
sno: 55
---

After Arjuna Kārtavīrya, his descendants such as Tālajaṅgha and Vitihotra continue to besiege the Aikṣvākus, Kanyākubjas and Kāśīs. The Kanyākubja line ends with Lauhi during this period, indicating their kingdom was broken by Haihaya incursions. Bāhuka of the Aikṣvāku line is defeated by Tālajaṅgha, forced into exile, and the Ayodhyā kingdom put into disarray. It’s curious that Bāhuka’s wife is named Yādavī, indicating that she was a daughter of the Yādava tribe. Perhaps to the Haihayas, now a distant offshoot of the Yādavas, such marital alliances made no difference. Mythology tells us that Bāhuka’s wife is pregnant for many years and gives birth long after his death to Sagara Aikṣvāku. Historically, this is interpreted to mean that Sagara was Bāhuka’s descendant by a few generations. From multiple accounts we can piece together a fairly complete story of Sagara’s life and reign.

He is born in the āśrama of sage Aurva, a Bhārgava ṛṣi related to Jamadagni. Remember that the Bhārgavas have long been troubled by Haihayas, and tradition indicates that for many generations they’ve held a deep grudge. The young Sagara grows up thinking the sage to be his father, but one day his mother tells him his true ancestry. He is born in a long line of rulers, the royal descendant of Manu, Ikṣvāku, Śrāvasta and Māndhātṛ. The people of Ayodhyā are at this time scattered, living in fear of both Tālajāṅghas and Rākṣasas, the latter now occupying ancient Ayodhyā and Kāśī. These broken Aikṣvāku people are marshalled by a Vasiṣṭha ṛṣi, and informed that the descendant of Bāhuka survives in Aurva’s āśrama. The people approach Sagara and appeal to him to take the mantle, to restore Ayodhyā to its former glory. Thus begin Sagara’s campaigns.

The first conquests are in the Gangetic Plains around Ayodhyā, securing the larger kingdom of Kosala. Sagara is described here as a merciful king. He gives enemy soldiers ample warning before attack, and the opportunity to either surrender or flee. Soldiers who surrender are assured safety as long as they do not take up arms again. Minor rulers are allowed to retain their kingdoms as long as they accept Sagara’s overlordship. Turning south to the Narmadā, against the Haihayas of Māhiṣmatī, Sagara is less merciful. His campaigns here are described in brutal terms. He grounds Haihaya cities to dust, shatters their walls, and burns whatever remains of their settlements. He kills the last surviving Haihayas and brings an end to the line, an act that is crystallised as Rāma Jamadāgneya’s ending of the kṣatriya line. The south thus secured, Sagara turns to the north, from where Kambojas, Yavanas, Kīraṭas, Pāhlavas and other tribes had long besieged his ancestors (we cannot make speculations on the identity and ethnicity of these enemy tribes). There is geographical ambiguity in this part of his campaigns. Modern Haryana/UP/Punjab at this time was no political vacuum. Both Ānavas and Druhyus had well-settled kingdoms of the pre-Harappan phase, while Pūru remnants were developing the Sothi-Siswal culture of the Sarasvatī. On the Yamunā’s southern reaches, the Yādavas had a powerful federation of kingdoms. Further, the Yamunā and Sarasvatī systems were separated by a dense forest that would exist till the Mahābhārata era centuries later.

Where then did Kambojas, Yavanas, Śākas, Kīraṭas and others attack the Aikṣvākus from? The likelier route is via Himalayan passes of modern Nepal and Uttaranchal. Tibet and the northern province of Xinjiang in modern China were part of Bhadravarṣa country in the ancient era. In past manvantaras it was populated with Ādityas, Daityas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Kinnaras and other Neolithic tribes, and to its north were nomadic mountain people like Uragas and Caraṇas. In the current manvantara, the civilisation of the Gangetic Plains would have frequently invited raids and invasions. The Purāṇas confirm this when they say that Sagara’s campaigns against Kambojas and the others took him north.

They also confirm that these tribes were not culturally alien. Chased by Sagara’s forces, they approach none other than ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha for help. The ṛṣi notes that most of the survivors are old men, children and women. He advises Sagara to adopt mercy and a different route of penalty. The defeated tribes are forced to eschew holy rites, modes of prayer and the existing patterns of dressing. Sagara also assigns embarrassing hairstyles to the royal males among them. Some are made to shave half their beards, others disallowed from ever sporting them fully. The Kambojas are made to wear beards without a moustache, which incidentally is the style sported by the famous Priest-King idol of Mohenjodaro. Mostly survivors of royal lines, this for them is equal to excommunication. They are forced away from the cultural sphere and spread out into mleccha lands.

His enemies conquered, Sagara now goes on a journey of alliance-building. He visits the Vidarbha Yādavas, who give their daughter Keśinī in marriage to him. He’s welcomed handsomely by his maternal uncles, the Śūrasena Yādavas. And then Ayodhyā celebrates the return of a king, in a manner better known to Indians for a later king in his line. The grand city, now reclaimed from Rākṣasa tribes and restored to its former glory, decorates itself in welcome of a great dynast. Paurāṇika descriptions of this return are no less festive than a Dīpāvali- Ayodhyā described as a city lit with lamps and decked in all kinds of colours. It’s unclear how many years it’s taken him, but Sagara has possibly built the largest federation of his times.

Sagara and his dynasty owe much to their ancestor Māndhātṛ, whose reign triggered a series of events with political and organisational ramifications. If Māndhātṛ had not broken the Ānava, Druhyu and Pūru kingdoms, the Sarasvatī cultures might have matured half a millennia earlier than when they did. The Haihayas might never have broken into the Gangetic Plains, or if they did then Sagara would have had Pūru allies in pushing them back. Māndhātṛ’s campaigns made the difference between a mature SSC at 2500 BC, the reality, and a mature SSC at 3000 BC, the possibility. This in turn would have influenced the evolution of OCP and the conditions of the Aikṣvākus by the time of Sagara. Without Māndhātṛ, the Pūrus might have grown to be too large a power by 3000 BC for any other tribe to contend with, which their descendants the Bhāratas and Kurus did anyway.

Sagara’s name does not occur in all of Vedic literature, which makes sense when it’s considered the literature of the Bhārata dynasty. Later in his life he visits his childhood guru, Aurva, seeking his blessings for an heir- a chronic problem for Aikṣvāku kings. To his wife Keśinī is born the son Asmanjasa, and to Sumatī are born 60,000 sons. There follows an elaborate myth around these 60,000 sons. Desirous of reconsolidating his kingdom and reinforcing the social contracts with other tribes, Sagara conducts a symbolic aśvamedha ritual. A sacrificial horse is let loose, which the 60,000 sons promptly lose track of. In their search for it they’re led deep into the earth, where they come upon the sage Kapila. Taking him for the horse-thief they attack, and are burnt to ashes by the sage’s mystic power. In some versions of the myth the 60,000 sons, in their search for the horse, dig up the entire earth and create the ocean- thus the ocean is now called sāgara. This act disturbs both Ādityas and Daityas, who appeal to Mahāviṣṇu for help. Mahāviṣṇu assures them that the sons will soon encounter Kapila and order will be restored.

Sagara’s elder son Asmanjasa is a terror to his people. He behaves scandalously and often abducts children. The people complain, and Sagara banishes his son. Thus when news reaches him of the death of his 60,000 sons, he tasks his grandson Aṁśumān with bringing the horse and ashes back. Aṁśumān succeeds in bringing the horse, but for the ashes he’s told by Kapila to wait another generation. Pleased with this assurance Sagara crowns him king and retires. Aṁśumān’s son is Dilīpa I, and both die in the endeavour to bring the ashes of Sagara’s 60,000 sons back. The reign now passes to Bhagīratha, who will learn of his ancestors’ mission and commit himself to it. But what does this myth really mean?

A connected story at this time tells us that the 60,000 sons, in digging up the earth, create the ocean. On the western coast of India, near Gokarṇa, this forces the sage Agastya to drink the ocean to save the land from flooding. North of that, near the Narmadā’s mouth, Rāma Jamadāgneya must throw his axe into the ocean and cause land to erupt- an act of land reclamation. For the Aikṣvākus, they believe their digging of the earth has invited Kapila’s wrath. The wrath is visited to them as the earth shaking, the ground parching up, the burning of everything and the reduction of Sagara’s sons to ash. Whatever Sagara’s sons did, it’s unlikely that could have impacted people as far away as Gokarṇa. But that these myths converge tells us that large parts of India experienced a massive cataclysm around this time.

This is speculative and non-falsifiable territory. This era of Indian history will never ‘speak’ to us. When the Indus script is decisively deciphered, we’d be miraculously lucky if it tell us anything about kingdoms on the Gaṅgā. Any earthquake we do find in this period of history will inevitably lead us into circular logic, and no new information or myths will become available about Sagara. An earthquake/ drought scenario is the most plausible fit for what the myths describe as Kapila’s wrath. 60,000 is more representative of a warrior force or even an entire late-Neolithic tribe, an indication that the cataclysm affected everyone. The tremors were felt in western India as well, giving rise to Agastya and Rāma Jamadāgneya myths. Perhaps the epicenter was in central India, or perhaps the earthquake was massive and radiated from the Tibetan Plateau. An earthquake of this proportion would have rearranged the entire river system. A widespread drought followed in the Gangetic Plains. Perhaps the Gaṅgā itself disappeared, or likelier some of its tributaries did and its flow weakened considerably. The land burned, things turned to ash, and the waters of the Gaṅgā did not even sanctify them.

Thus is born a generations-long imperative. The waters have to be returned, Gaṅgā has to be brought back to earth, and the ashes of fallen Aikṣvākus have to be sanctified. It begins in Sagara’s time when Aṁśumān returns with the sacrificial horse- the discovery of where Gaṅgā has disappeared underground. Aṁśumān and his son both dedicate themselves to the cause, both dying to it. The people of Ayodhyā meanwhile pick themselves back up, and the dying wish of their dynastic founder fades from priority. When Bhagīratha comes to power a century later, he must be reminded of Sagara’s dream.

We’ve previously visited the three Gaṅgās of ancient India. The first resided in the sky as the Milky Way, Ākāśa Gaṅgā. The second sat in the lap of mount Meru, the Hema Gaṅgā. The third was brought to earth by two people, Bhagīratha and Gotama. Here the Gaṅgā is also called Bhāgīrathī and Gautamī. Historical discovery, exploration and excavation lie at the root of both myths. A few decades before Bhagīratha, the Āṅgirasa sage Dīrghatamās in north Bihar is set adrift the Gaṅgā, likely modern Kosi. He flows downstream to the great delta, discovering where Gaṅgā meets the ocean in the kingdom of Aṅga of the eastern Ānavas. Here he adopts the name Gotama, and this path of the Gaṅgā is thus called Gautamī, also known as southern Gaṅgā to those of the Gangetic Plains. The northern Gaṅgā, known today at places as Bhāgīrathī, Jahnāvī or Alakanandā, was never fully explored till Bhagīratha.