---
title: samudra manthana
sno: 31
---

There follows a period of relative peace where people are free to practice their religion and there’s amity between the descendants of Kaśyapa. In a separate story, Prahlāda goes hunting near the Narmadā river where he meets the Bhārgava ṛṣi Cyavana. Cyavana informs him of the Naimiṣa forest in modern Uttar Pradesh, sacred grounds already. This tells us that Prahlāda is hitherto unfamiliar with northern India and gives us a way to place the Daityas originally in southern India. We also know that Tāraka and his descendants are placed near the Mahānadī delta. Can we thus say with certainty that Daityas were indigenous southern Indians? Even if so, this does not automatically make Ādityas northern Indians or invaders. The two tribes are descended from the same father, a way for tradition to tell us that their origins are from the same source. That father, Kaśyapa, is usually placed in northern India around Kashmir (Kaśyapa Mīra). We could speculate that the first tribes arose here, and while the Daityas moved largely south the Ādityas migrated all around. This could explain why Āditya names travelled the world over but Daitya names remained in southern India. But the association of ancient Celtics with Danu overturns the scenario. It’s a good lesson for those who try to find binary divisions and migrations in history.

On his way to the Naimiṣa forest, Prahlāda and his forces come upon the Sarasvatī river, arguably the first reference to it in our chronology. Here they meet a tribe known as the Naranārāyaṇas, who defeat Prahlāda after a quick but decisive battle. Dejected and ashamed, Prahlāda abdicates rule and hands it to his cousin, Andhaka. This Andhaka is originally a child of the Rudras who was adopted by Hiraṇyākṣa. Andhaka establishes a new Daitya kingdom under the counsel of Śukra Bhārgava. Śukra develops a stratagem of war for Andhaka following which the latter attacks the Ādityas, who are at the time led by an Indra named Śatakratu. This is the next great Deva-Asura war, and Daitya veterans such as Prahlāda and his son Virocana are killed here by Śatakratu Indra. The Daityas are defeated in this round, and with their patriarchs dead the rule passes to Prahlāda’s grandson, Bali.

Paurāṇika genealogies of the current manvantara, though elaborate, still indicate that some loss of names and generations has happened. In other words, though the Purāṇas give us 94 generations between Vaivasvat Manu and Kṛṣṇa the real number could be higher. It’s reasonable to conclude that such losses would have been higher for the previous manvantaras. Kazanas’ Preservation Principle comes to mind here. We could modify it to express a different view- the longer a story has survived among a people, the greater the loss of details within it. Loss of fidelity in details is to be expected when the focus is on retaining core themes, lessons and traditions. So when the Purāṇas give us a straight line of descent from Hiraṇyakaśipu to Bali, placing only two generations between them, we should take it with a pinch of salt. It’s more likely that Daitya genealogies have been preserved with little diligence, and later composers have taken liberties with truth for the sake of convenience, more so because the myths of Diti’s first sons could be prehistoric geological composites. Therefore, though tradition tells us that Bali was Prahlāda’s grandson, it’s safer to assume that he was a somewhat distant descendant.

Support from this comes from the Purāṇas themselves. We are told that Bali reigns during the Cākṣuṣa manvantara, which is the sixth and immediately precedes our own. Further, the Indra during his time is named Mantradruma, whereas during Prahlāda’s era Śatakratu ruled as Indra. The Ādityas of early generations were ambitious but weak, needing waves of combined effort to take on Daitya heavyweights such as Hiraṇyakaśipu, Gṛṣaṇa, Mahiṣāsura, Vṛtrāsura and Tārakāsura. But in Bali’s time they are a powerful tribe secure in their supremacy, and major Daitya-Dānava leaders are either long deceased or have migrated away from the central lands. Reminded of his great ancestry by Śukra, Bali embarks on a campaign of conquest. He conducts several aśvamedha and rājasūya rituals and crowns himself the new Daitya monarch, an open challenge to his more powerful cousins.

Bali’s reign is an era of benevolence and generosity. He’s described as an indiscriminate and honest king, a worshipper of both Devī and Mahāviṣṇu, and a friend to the ṛṣis. It’s a period when grains are consumed without being tilled (which meant they were wild), along with fruits and flowers of all kinds. This coincides with a waning of power among the Ādityas, which mythology explains as a curse upon Mantradruma by the sage Durvāsa. This time it’s Aditi who performs severe meditation and appeals to Mahāviṣṇu to help her sons. Thus is born to her the Vāmanāvatāra, or Dwarf Viṣṇu. He appears to Bali as a young boy, humble and innocent. Śukrācārya sees through the ruse and warns Bali not to grant the boy anything. But ever the generous ruler, Bali grants the boy his wish of three steps of land. The boy proceeds to manifest his full form. The dwarf turns giant, and in three steps takes over all three of Bali’s realms- Svarga, Prithvī, Pātāla. In his final step he pushes Bali down to Pātāla and Prithvī is free again for the Ādityas to conquer.

The myth lends itself to many fringe historical speculations. A literal interpretation should mean that Vāmana merely exiled Bali to the Pātāla region, but where or what is Pātāla? Answers range from Tibet (Lhasa with its Potala Palace), the Malayan Peninsula, Indonesia and a lost continent of Lemuria to the other side of the planet in Mexico, Colombia and Peru. Given that Bali is soon invited by the Ādityas for the great ocean churning we should conclude that his interests coincided with Āditya interests even after his encounter with Vāmana. This alone should preclude a Mexico, for there’s no reason for a man exiled there to concern himself with metallurgy and agriculture in the Indian subcontinent (even with our skepticisms on ancient geography and maritime travel suspended for a moment). If we alternately place him south/southeast of the Tibetan Plateau and Gangetic Plains, as some interpretations of Pātāla imply, it allows for an exile and shared concerns both. Some support for this comes from the fact that Bali’s son, Bāṇa, is placed in modern Assam. Of course, Bali’s induction in the ocean churning myth could be a later insertion, in which case his encounter with Vāmanāvatāra was his last appearance in history.

In most Paurāṇika versions, sometime after Bali’s exile the Ādityas are counselled by their ṛṣi Bṛhaspati to engage in a great churning of the cosmic ocean. This is in part necessitated by Śukra’s possession of a resurrection potion, through which he resurrects any Asuras the Ādityas kill- including Bali after his exile (to death) by Vāmana. But weakened owing to Durvāsa’s curse on Mantradruma Indra, the Ādityas cannot do this alone. Thus they approach Bali in Pātāla and request for his help, and a negotiation is crafted to share the spoils of this churning. This is the Samudra Manthana myth of Hindu literature. Visiting the story, as is, reveals only layers of supernaturality. A snake wrapped around a mountain, itself supported by a tortoise which is Mahāviṣṇu incarnate, all being worked by Gods on one side and Demons on the other. Viewed this way it would seem the story has nothing historic to give us. In reality, the tale is a kernel event for our fractal maṇḍala.

The churning first throws up Hālāhala, or poison. In some versions this poison is emitted by Vāsuki, the serpent-dragon wrapped around the mountain.  This is consumed by Śiva, earning himself the epithet Nīlakaṇṭha- the Blue-Throated One. The mountain begins to drown under its own weight, so Mahāviṣṇu incarnates as Kurmāvatāra, the tortoise, and supports it on his back. Then emerge the many ratnas, or treasures, of the ocean churning. First is Lakṣmī, or Wealth, and she is taken by Viṣṇu. Then emerge Apsarās such as Rambhā and Menakā, who choose Gandharvas as their consorts. Varuṇī the consort of Varuṇa comes next. Follows Kāmadhenu, a wish-granting cow, who is gifted to the sages to help with their rituals. Airāvata, the king of elephants, is taken by Indra as his steed and Ucchaiśravas, the divine horse, is claimed by Bali (Indra, the great “Aryan God,” chooses not the horse but the elephant!). A divine jewel, bow and conch are all taken by Viṣṇu, while an eternal tree is taken by Indra to be installed at Indraloka. Also emerges Dhanvantari, a divine physician with the knowledge of healing. And in his arms he carries that which brings everyone here- Amṛtam, the elixir of immortality, the philosopher’s stone that Bali wants as bad as Mantradruma does.

A fight breaks out over it, for the Daityas have allowed most extractions to the Ādityas and now rightly think they have a claim over the amṛtam. After the Tārakāsura war this is the next great battle between the ancient Indian tribes. True to character, Viṣṇu first tries a bit of deception which nearly works. But a war between Daityas and Ādityas was ordained ever since Bali’s rise to power. He is killed by Mantradruma and the Ādityas emerge victorious, once again shifting the balance of power. What does any of this mean in a historical setting?