---
title: sandrocottus and the first tether
sno: 14
---

Sandrocottus was mentioned by Megasthenes, a Greek who was sent by Alexander and who resided at Sandrocottus’ court in Palibothra. The early British historian William Jones, when trying to find a way to link Indian chronology with Judeo-Christian chronology, had a eureka moment when he spotted in Paurāṇika genealogies the name Candragupta of the Maurya dynasty- evidently cognate with Sandrocottus. This gave to us the First Tether of Indian history, a synchronism crucial to placing all of Paurāṇika history within a consistent chronology. The Purāṇas give us the names of all kings preceding Candragupta Maurya starting with Vaivasvat Manu, and dating the Mauryan founder allowed us to assign plausible dates for all figures of Paurāṇika myth.

But rarely is the mapping of separate histories so smooth a task. None of the implications of equating Sandrocottus with Candragupta Maurya really line up. For one, it makes Megasthenes contemporaneous with Kautilya of the Arthaśāstra. If Megasthenes did indeed live in Candragupta’s court, it’s remarkable that his writings make no mention of Kautilya, Cāṇakya or Viṣṇu Gupta (though the original work is lost to us, and we know of Megasthenes only in the quotations of later writers). Equally are Cāṇakya’s writings devoid of any reference to Megasthenes or Alexander, which is surprising given the latter’s Great fame. Mainstream history’s approach of course is to discredit the Indian account and render Kautilya ahistorical.

Secondly, Megasthenes mentioned Xandrames as Sandrocottus’ predecessor and Amitroghates as his successor. We are asked to accept Mahāpadma Nanda and Bindusara (with an epithet Amitraghāta) as fitting candidates here, but the cognacy is untenably less than that between Sandrocottus and Candragupta. We are also told that Seleucus Nicator, a successor of Alexander, gave his daughter in marriage to either Sandrocottus or his son. But on the Indian side there is no record of Candragupta or his son marrying a Greek/Yavana princess. Further, there are reasons to believe that Candragupta’s capital was at Girivraja and not Pāṭalīputra, the latter being equated to Megasthenes’ Palibothra. Indian literature of those centuries is in fact curiously silent on Alexander the Great. It knows nothing of the Indian Porus he fought, and the Pūrus that Porus is identified with had long ceased to be a major dynasty. Paurāṇika, Buddhist and Jain texts know nothing of Alexander’s invasion, or of any significant defeat on the Indian side to a major Greek advance. These problems acquire a new dimension when we consider another Candragupta in India some seven centuries later.

This Candragupta, founder of the Imperial Gupta Dynasty, succeeded Candramāsa of the previous dynasty. Either he or his son Samudragupta did take on a Yavana wife, and their capital was decidedly at Pāṭalīputra and not Girivraja. Candramāsa as Xandrames is a far likelier connection than Mahāpadma Nanda as Xandrames, but already our skeptical minds must be highly alarmed. What’s suggested here is a discrepancy of seven centuries! It implies that we date the Maurya dynasty not to the 4th century BC but to the 12th century BC, and pull up the Imperial Gupta Dynasty by an equal measure. But the latter is an epigraphically well-attested dynasty, and redrawing seven centuries unleashes a series of unresolvable cascading effects on history.

The case of Indian history’s First Tether seeks to remind us that absolute chronology of the ancient past is not an exact science. Our dating of the Maurya dynasty to the 4th century BC hangs on the single connection of Sandrocottus with Candragupta, itself invalidated when similar connections are sought in the names of his predecessor and successor. We may argue for the inscriptionally attested Aśoka, Candragupta’s grandson. But here too contentions around Aśoka’s identification with Devanampriya Priyadarśi and inconsistencies around the Kaliṅga war reveal the tenuous nature of the First Tether. The following chronologisation accepts this tether, and when it dates the Mahābhārata back from the coronation of Mahāpadma Nanda it accepts him as Xandrames, the king who preceded Sandrocottus. But it serves a skeptical mind well to remember that the basic certitudes of history are not as certain as we’re led to believe. It can be added here that a wealth of independent and amateur research exists online that has found inconsistencies in world chronologies during the 1st millennium AD. The problem of mapping different calendars to the Judeo-Christian one is not limited to India alone.

A point here is to be made about cognate words. There is no linguistic rule that proves Sandrocottus = Candragupta. This is an assumption made by one man and accepted unchallenged by humanity after him. But any number of such cognate connections are routinely dismissed by reputationists as having no basis. For example, when Talageri equates Bhalānas to Bolan/Baluch or Pārthavas to Parthian or even, with candid doubt, Piśācin to Viśaṇin, reputationists deride this as ‘folk etymology.’ We won’t comment on that here save observing that for some reason Meluhha = Mleccha, or Sandrocottus = Candragupta, or Xandrames = Mahāpadma Nanda are not folk etymologies! In the case of Meluhha = Mleccha, we’re asked to believe that a civilisation in the Middle East and the Vedic Aryans both developed similar sounding words for an ‘other’ culture- the Harappan. So be it for now, and we accept the First Tether as is to get a date of around 424 BC for the coronation of Mahāpadma Nanda or Xandrames. This lets us approach the Second Tether of Indian history, but before we do so we need to understand how the ancient Indians divided time and their own history.