---
title: sarga, primary creation
sno: 19
---

Angry winds rush through the cave as she enters, their primal roar sending a chill down her spine. Darkness engulfs her quickly, and she navigates by feeling her hands across the narrowing crevices. She bumps her head against a sharp edge, and blood trickles down scalp to chin. Wind echoes through the gaps, howling like a pack of wild animals. Then the gap turns sideways and she’s creeping on her back. So deep underground, even the wind falls silent. When the crevice turns impossibly narrow, when she can squeeze no further, she knows she’s reached her destination. She carefully pulls out her red dye and begins to paint on the walls. Close to 40,000 years later, her anatomically modern descendants will look at what she painted and wonder why she did it. Why did she do it? Why did she and her contemporaries leave behind symbols, images and meaning when they had no way of knowing these would be examined by people thousands of years later? And why did no humans do so for thousands of years before them? Were these the first signs of human consciousness? Were these the first steps on the journey that led our species to ask- what is the meaning of life, the universe and everything?

When did we first ask this question? Somewhere along our journey from ancient ape to modern man, a kind of sapience arose in us that hasn’t been found in other living beings. Between 3 and 5 million years ago, hominid brains expanded dramatically compared to those possessed by their ape cousins, leading to critical improvements in cognition and several other conditions that differentiate the homo genus from other ape families. 100,000 years ago in India, the wild rodent was already on a trajectory that would evolve the domestic mouse- a consequence of cohabiting with agrarian human cultures. 40,000 years ago, the first homo sapiens left behind paintings on the walls of prehistoric caves. Something happened between 3 million and 40,000 years ago that gave our human ancestors the awareness of their existence within a larger world and crucially, the ability to ask what their place in it is.

Cave paintings are first attested in India at the Bhimbetka Cave Shelters, a UNESCO World Heritage Site that evidences inhabitation 100,000 years ago. Here prehistoric humans left art on the walls of their caves depicting early scenes of dancing and hunting. We must remember that these people were as capable of asking existential questions as we are, and they arguably dedicated more time, culture and clarity to the matter than our societies do today. A distinguishing characteristic of humans is their ability to pass knowledge down from one generation to another, a trait not manifest in other apes and primates to such a degree. For the majority of human existence, this was possible solely through oral traditions, through matriarchs instructing young children on the passage of seasons, through patriarchs on how to sharpen stones or hunt big game, through fathers on how to shape pots best and mothers on how to eliminate weeds. What such humans were telling their successors can never be learnt with certitude, but Indians thousands of years after them compiled such stories into the Purāṇas. In the story of Brahmā and his first progeny is revealed what ancient Indians thought they knew about the origins of civilisation.