---
title: shashabindu chaitraratha
sno: 46
---

If in Yayāti’s time we find a Neolithic populace open for colonisation, then by Śaśabindu Caitraratha’s time it’s a crowded scenario with several tribes and dynasties vying for power- a clear sign of different populations expanding and encountering each other. Roughly three centuries have passed since Yayāti’s reign, the realm now divided between a conglomerate of five Ailā tribes and a diverse set of other tribes such as Aikṣvākus, Kāśīs, Nāgas, Niṣadhas and others.

To Pūru descended the main kingdom- modern day Delhi/Haryana to Pratiṣṭhāna (Prayagraj). Anu was sent further north, such that the first historical setting for his people are the regions of Punjab and Kashmir. Druhyu was sent west/north-west (Pakistan/Afghanistan) and Turvaśa was sent south/south-east. Yadu and his people spread across modern day Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. Yadu and Turvaśa are almost always mentioned together, and the Turvaśas disappear from literature very early. The second cakravartin, Śaśabindu Caitraratha, was born in the Yadu dynasty at 20 generations after Vaivasvat Manu. A number of synchronisms help establish his relative position and also outline the political scenario of this time. His daughter married Māndhātṛ Yauvanāśva, giving us a glimpse into the early relations between Yādavas and Aikṣvākus. Among the Pūrus his contemporaries could have been Matinara or more likely Tāmsu (who was ancestor to Duṣyanta and Bharata). The Yādava line by now was split in two. While the primary line descended to Śaśabindu, the secondary line of Haihayas was flourishing under Kunti (though their major monarchs will appear later). We can also surmise that his Druhyu contemporary was Aṅgāra, who would later be defeated by Māndhātṛ.

Political pressures have thus multiplied by Śaśabindu’s time, unlike the relatively idyllic times of Yayāti. Not only has his own line split in two, he also has to engage in marital relations with Aikṣvākus- far from his own base. And the political power that Yayāti had concentrated is fragmented among the pañcajana people. The pre-Harappan cities on Sarasvatī at this stage are under Pūru control, while Śaśabindu’s people colonise the lower Yamunā and Carmaṇavatī rivers. Śaśabindu is referred to in the Mahābhārata once as an example to Yudhiṣṭhira of a king who performs śrādha. We are told that after receiving from Yama a detailed account of when and why to conduct śrādha, Śaśabindu acts accordingly, conducts various śrādhas and subjugates the entire earth (Āryavarta in this context). In another place Śaśabindu is mentioned in a list of kings that abstained from flesh-consumption during the month of Krittikā, and as principal among the assembled kings. References in a few other places show us that, like Yayāti, Śaśabindu conducted sacrifices and donated generously.

A detailed account is also given of Śaśabindu’s marriage to a hundred thousand wives, and of the thousand sons born from each wife. Genealogical analysis shows that Śaśabindu was a progenitor figure in his own right. He did have several sons, and by 10-15 generations after him the Yadus have split into Vṛṣṇis, Cedis and more- all descended from Śaśabindu. Perhaps it’s this truth which the myth of his thousands of sons tries to capture. But the sons certainly played a role in his conquests. They performed aśvamedhas for him, wore “golden mail armour” and were “excellent bowmen.” Monarchy, war and kṣatriyatva have clearly emerged by Śaśabindu’s time. We can draw a speculative landscape of his life such:

- This was a period of all-round expansion in Āryavarta. In the north the Ānavas were spreading further in Kashmir/Pakistan areas, while to the west the Druhyus had likely established contact with Mehrgarh.
- We see therefore the beginnings of the SSC- with its known geography at this stage being occupied primarily by Yādavas and Pūrus with Ānavas and Druhyus at the periphery.
- We see no evidence for conflicts between Yādavas and Pūrus, and with the Aikṣvākus Śaśabindu established marital relations. Thus his expansions/conquests would not have encroached into their territories.
- Instead, Śaśabindu’s expansions must have focused on the lower Yamunā, and the Carmaṇavatī and Vetrāvatī rivers. Here they would have come into contact with an assortment of tribes in varying states of Mesolithic/Neolithic existence.
- Since it’s likely that there was no overt enmity between Yādavas and Pūrus, we can surmise that the SSC at this stage was a peaceful federation of filially-related monarchs- a situation compatible with archaeology.

A lot of the above could have happened after Śaśabindu’s time, under the reign of his descendants. But we can certainly trace some antecedents to the mature SSC phase that was to come later. Parallel to Śaśabindu’s expansion, the Pūrus were colonising the upper Sarasvatī and Yamunā rivers. At the periphery, with some clans among them already outside the Indian horizon, the Ānavas and Druhyus added to the diverse mix. By generation 20 then all of the northern Indian sub-continent is coming under Ārya sway, led primarily by the Ailā lines. To the south we can assume that a similar expansion was happening among Turvaśa kings, but there’s nothing to inform us on this matter, Turvaśa possibly being as generic a name as ‘north Indian’ or ‘south Indian’ is today. Archaeologically the south at this stage was still Neolithic.

The kingdom descended to Śaśabindu’s elder son- Pṛthuśravasa, but there are ambiguities in how many other sons he had and whether they established kingdoms of their own. What we can say is that over the next several generations, Śaśabindu’s descendants and their Haihaya cousins emerge as a major political power in Āryavarta- often conquering ancient powers such as Kāśī and Ayodhyā. But in the immediate aftermath, it’s Śaśabindu’s son-in-law who picks up the mantle.