---
title: rudra, shiva, the other
sno: 25
---

Paurāṇika reading leaves little doubt that Śiva represents a figure from deep antiquity, likely prior to the Holocene. Framing it within a climatic context, we may imagine survivors of the LGM huddled in pockets of the Tibetan Plateau, where for thousands of years preceding them lived people given to generations of mountainous existence. To these survivors, the original inhabitants of Kailāsa would have appeared as superior beings- possessed of knowledge and abilities they weren’t. They would have looked up to such people, and under the guidance of these mountain tribes would humans have survived the LGM before descending to the plains to establish civilisation proper. This is why in any configuration of Hindu myth, in spite of odd stories here and there, Śiva defies a secondary origin. He appears an independent entity unto himself, and ultimately is self-originated in a manner of speaking. It’s near impossible to pinpoint to an original and historical Śiva, so far back in myth does the name go. What’s more likely is that there were multiple Śivas, Rudras and Śaṅkaras, but who were these people really?

Human societies have always contained misfits. The non-conformists and rebels. The ones who play by their own rules, and in doing so inevitably evoke respect and awe. In Brahmā’s lap one of his sons wailed incessantly, demanding again and again to be named by his father. And the first name he received was Rudra- the One Who Wails. Dissatisfied he continued to wail until he received seven more names- Bhava, Sarva, Iśaṇa, Paśupati, Bhīma, Ugra, Mahādeva. There were evidently more Rudras, and they appear to other early Indians as rebellious freethinkers, exemplars often of both austerity and hedonism. A paradox to early society, to organised attempts at settlement and civilisation. They carried an independent wisdom, one that even early ṛṣis did not quite understand. To this day true seekers go where the ancient Rudras once resided- Himālaya, Meru, Kailāsa. They seemed to want to be left to themselves, whether to extreme penance in the cold mountains or to secret dalliances in hidden groves. War, love, meditation- they did all to the extreme and could best any at these. In one form they inspired early warriors, in another those that sought inner exploration, and in yet another all those who society considered weird and misfit.

Such tribes were not tameable. They were both a part of society and yet not quite. Whether they would participate in affairs of the world, in the wars between Devas and Asuras, in teaching their meditative crafts to others who wished to follow- all depended on their leader. He was named Śiva, and like the Indras and the Bhṛgus, the Manus and the Varuṇas there were multiple Śivas in history. Later chroniclers merged the accounts, so deep in history does Śiva go. Even in an ultimate trinity of Hindu mythology he defies derivation from elsewhere. Śiva never really becomes historical at any stage, his many cameos so far apart in time that they make obvious that he’s entirely mythic, or that different historical personalities were fused into one. Civilisation turned to him as a connection to the mystic, wild and esoteric past even as it moved forward on the cultural, religious and technological continuum. If the Tibetan Plateau was indeed a haven for ethnogenesis during the LGM, then Rudras represent the original inhabitants. The older culture that gave refuge to a variety of survivors, a lighthouse of continuity and stability to people with broken memories. It certainly explains their deep association with Gaṅgā.

The ancient Indians knew of three Gaṅgās. The first Gaṅgā was in the night sky, the Milky Way galaxy or Ākāśa Gaṅgā. The second Gaṅgā was the roof of snow on top of the world, from which originated all the major world rivers as these Indians knew it. The region north of Kashmir running to the Pamir Mountains is even today called the Roof of the World, and in those high peaks lies a permanent coat of snow. This was the Hema Gaṅgā of ancient Indian geography. The Roof of the World is where Śiva lived, and between mount Meru to mount Kailāsa is where Śiva(s) were usually found. This is why ancient Indians thought that Śiva carried Gaṅgā in the matts of his hair. From this Hema Gaṅgā, among other rivers, also descended the Gaṅgā of Bhagīratha and later Indians.

Śiva appears most frequently in the early eras, featuring in the many tales of Daitya/Āditya activities. It’s possible to see, in at least some of them, a historical personality. But for the later eras, like when Śiva appears contemporary to Divodāsa II of Kāśī, we can be sure that he’s a mythic figure. Thus, instead of visiting all his tales we’ll focus on a select few cameos that happened during the early eras, primarily in Daitya-Āditya wars. Doing all of this together makes it impossible to separate myth from history, so we’ll instead visit such Śivas separately in consequent sections. For now, let’s look at the concluding event of this account of Primary Creation.