---
title: sindhu sarasvati civilisation
sno: 10
---

This book has so far used the terms Indus Valley or Harappan civilisation. These are academically sound names, for archaeological convention names civilisations after their first site found, which in this case was Harappa. The first sites discovered were also primarily around the Indus river and its tributaries, thus the civilisation was called Indus Valley Civilisation. But two later discoveries compel us to reconsider this second name. For one, a larger number of sites have eventually been discovered along the Ghaggar-Hakra river system (or the Sarasvatī river system). Secondly, we find that the civilisation has continuity from previous Chalcolithic and Neolithic cultures in north India, implying that it did not start in a vacuum.

For these reasons we now consider the Harappan phase as one in an existing civilisational spectrum, and speak of it as the Sindhu-Sarasvatī Civilisation (SSC). This is the name we’ll use for the remainder of this book. There need not be debate on technicalities, such as whether it should be Sarasvatī-Sindhu or Sindhu-Sarasvatī. Some claim that Sarasvatī should come first, since it was clearly the primary river and possessed a greater number of settlements. But we’ve found more sites on the Sarasvatī because of our enthusiasm to find SSC in post-partition India, while Pakistan’s interest in it is nowhere near ours. If it were, perhaps we would continue to find SSC sites in Pakistan, along the Indus. Let us settle for SSC then and agree that, despite differences in nomenclature, we talk about the same civilisation.

Human civilisational progress is divided into stages of culture. At the broadest level we divide it into the Stone Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age. Within these there are sub-periods and between them are transitional stages. Not all human cultures evolved similarly along these lines, nor did all reach the Bronze or Iron Ages together. For example, 1700 BC southern India was still in the Neolithic stage, while northern India was moving to the Iron Age. Some cultures skip entire stages. Only in some parts of northern India do we find a discrete Bronze Age, and southern India seems to jump directly from Neolithic to Iron Age. Within the Stone Age the latter stages are called Neolithic, or new stone age. Neolithic cultures are characterised by a move to early farming and sedentary lifestyles, the rise of pottery first handmade then wheel-made, animal husbandry and eventually the use of copper, which catalyses the onset of Chalcolithic- the transitional copper age between Neolithic and Bronze Age. Movement between these stages is neither linear nor discrete. Humans don’t just drop the tools of one age and adopt the next age overnight. Lifestyle practices that trigger such changes evolve in isolation and take time to gain hold before spreading out. Some tribes or communities move forward in this civilisational change while others don’t.

It involves different time periods for different cultures, but Chalcolithic people eventually develop advanced metallurgy and learn to create bronze, bringing us to the stage of mature civilisation. This coincides with other aspects of urbanisation- town planning, monumental buildings, long distance trade, use of weights and measures, writing, civic administration and specialised arts and crafts. In India this critical path manifested in the SSC’s mature stage in the 3rd millennium BC. But from thousands of years prior archaeology has discovered the complete imprint of Indian civilisational development.