---
title: sudas paijvana
sno: 65
---

Reams of analysis have been dedicated to aspects of Sudās’ life that are difficult to discern, for example a legendary Vasiṣṭha vs. Viśvāmitra rivalry, or a singular battle between ten kings. Simultaneously, the effort has ignored what stares us in the face- Sudās was not only a critical figure in PIE dispersal, he was likely mature SSC’s greatest conqueror. Most of his story can be gleaned from maṇḍala 7, which features Maitrāvaruṇi Vasiṣṭha as his official purohita. A spanner is thrown to this narrative by maṇḍala 3, where Viśvāmitra Gāthina is the purohita instead. It appears that Viśvāmitra was aligned to Sudās first and Vasiṣṭha at a later stage. Even if the converse is true, reality is that Viśvāmitra brings no great favours to Sudās beyond a point.

The image we get is of a gāthina of Vaiśvāmitra lineage trying to gain Sudās’ favour, and helping in navigation of the rivers Vipāś and Śatadrū. RV 3-53 is a hymn in glory of Viśvāmitra and his clan of Kuśikās. If the original Viśvāmitra Kauśika was in fact Sudās’ contemporary, the Kuśikās would have been Bhāratas too and needed no special introduction to a ruler of North Pāñcāla. Instead, the gāthina Sudās encounters is a distant descendant of Viśvāmitra, either spiritually, biologically or both. The hymn shows us a scenario where Sudās encounters the Kuśikas, and through them Vaiśvāmitras enter the Ṛgvedic tape-recording. This likely happens because, as a ruler of North Pāñcāla, Sudās’ immediate neighbours to the south are the Kuśikas of Kanyākubja. Verse 9 is translated by Griffith as “*through Kuśikas, Indra grew friendly to Sudās*” while JB prefer “t*hrough Sudās, Indra grew friendly with the Kuśikas*.” The latter is likely the correct translation, since Sudās and the Bhāratas were no strangers to Indra. Verses 21-24 are taken as Viśvāmitra scorn upon Vasiṣṭha but this is entirely imagined, for the latter name appears nowhere in the hymn.

We learn through RV 3-33 that Viśvāmitra and Sudās are placed between the Vipāś and Śatadru rivers, so this represents a phase earlier in Sudās’ reign than his campaigns beyond the Paruṣṇī. This is all there is to Vasiṣṭha vs. Viśvāmitra in the Ṛgveda. The scenario has been read as Sudās changing his purohita at some point in his reign, coming to favour Vasiṣṭha over Viśvāmitra. We can surmise this much, but no hymns support a great ideological clash, and it’s imagined owing to the original Viśvāmitra’s rivalry with Devarāja Vasiṣṭha- a figure known to the Purāṇas but not to the Vedas. The gāthina of Sudās’ era might have even been aware of that rivalry, and been motivated by it. The definitive change that Sudās does make is from Āṅgirasas to Vāsiṣṭhas, and we can be sure this happened, because Āṅgirasas were Bhārata purohitas from Bharata up to Divodāsa. Only in Sudās’ time do we see a Vāsiṣṭha emerging as the favoured Bhārata priest. This happens as Sudās’ campaigns take him to modern Punjab, to the rivers Śatadru, Irāvatī and Vitastā. Here resides, for generations since Māndhātṛ and renewed over time, a line of Aikṣvāku kings with Vāsiṣṭhas as their purohitas. In the centuries immediately preceding Sudās, the Aikṣvāku presence in these parts has strengthened, owing first to Daśaratha’s marriage to Kaikeyī Ānava, and then to campaigns by her son and grandsons (which established antecedents for Taxila and Peshawar).

RV 7-18 is called the Dāśarājña hymn, or the Battle of Ten Kings. In common narrative, it’s an account of Sudās’ battle with an Ānava conglomerate of ten kings along the Paruṣṇī (or Irāvatī) river. But a complete examination of its 25 verses reveals it to be an account of Sudās’ reign, of his many battles with tribes across Bhāratavarṣa, and his knitting together of a vast kingdom/federation. This is high claim, for indigenists are already criticised for reading more into the hymn than exists. But we make it given the context established so far. We make it because we know that Sudās lived in around 2500 BC, and this gives us a lot to infer from. When we see his geographical placement we cannot but link it to SSC archaeology, and when we see him crossing rivers of Punjab we know the direction and impact of his campaigns.

Composed by Maitrāvaruṇi Vasiṣṭha, the first four verses of the hymn are accounts of past battles by Indra, lauding his deeds as an invocation for similar beatitude upon Sudās, Maitrāvaruṇi’s patron. The hymn has a tone of being chanted in the past tense, either at the end of Sudās’ long reign or at a rājasūya following his many victories. It should be noted that dāśarājña translates only as ‘ten kings,’ and the “Battle of” is added in English on taking the 25 verses to account for a single battle- which is not true at all.

Verse 5 has Indra helping Sudās cross wide floods, and an enemy king named Śimyu either faces defeat or is drowned. At this stage we do not know which river is being referred to, and we shouldn’t assume it’s necessarily the same river mentioned in verse 8 (Paruṣṇī). It’s safe to say though that Sudās’ campaigns here cover the areas of modern Punjab, over the Ṛgvedic rivers Śatadru, Paruṣṇi, Asiknī and Vitastā. Verse 6 gives us Turvaśa Puroḍās as Sudās’ enemy, portraying him as greedy for wealth and cattle. He’s aided by Bhṛgus and Druhyus, who must be taken as Sudās’ enemies as well. This is a bit of discontinuity. The Turvaśas are placed in southern India, so we shouldn’t expect to find them in Punjab. We see later that Sudās campaigns along the Yamunā too, and along its southern tributaries he may have encountered Yādavas and Turvaśas. Verse 7 is rich with information, and critical to analysing all of RV 7-18 from a PIE lens. In line 1, the verse names Pākthas, Bhalānas, Alinas, Viṣāṇins and Śivas as Sudās’ enemies, and line 2 tells us that many Ārya friends come to the aid of Tṛtsus in search for glory and spoil.

Many opinions exist on the identity of the Tṛtsus. They are no doubt friendly to Sudās and the Bhāratas, but the exact nature of their relationship is not always clear. RV 7-18-7 refers to Tṛtsus in the plural, and claims that Ārya friends had come to the Tṛtsus’ aid. Presumably, Tṛtsus here refers to Sudās’ and his forces. This is affirmed in 7-18-19, where the Tṛtsus (as Sudās) aid Indra in defeating Bheda along the Yamunā. Talageri thus concludes that the Tṛtsus are a specific clan of Bhāratas who hold political power in the Ṛgveda, represented by kings such as Divodāsa and Sudās (this makes them equitable to North Pāñcālas). An opposing view is that Tṛtsu refers to the clan of Vāsiṣṭhas that align with Sudās, but this is countered by a number of verses. 7-33-6 declares that the Tṛtsus flourish once Vasiṣṭha becomes their leader, a reference that Sudās’ Tṛtsus are benefited with Vasiṣṭha as their purohita. 7-83-4 explicitly refers to Vasiṣṭha as “Tṛtsus’ priest,” making the distinction clear. Some read the description of Tṛtsus in 7-83-8 as “having braided hair and donning white robes” to be a semblance of Vāsiṣṭha ṛṣis, but the consequent description of being “skilled in song, homage and hymn” could easily refer to gāthinas or Vaiśvāmitras! These descriptions should not be taken too literally, and the conclusion that Tṛtsus are a sub-branch of the Bhāratas, with Vasiṣṭha as their purohita and Sudās as their leader, is a fair one.

Moving on in the Dāśarājña hymn, verse 8 is the one that names Kavi Cāyamāna, except not so to either Griffith or JB. Academic analysis of the Dāśarājña hymn is strangely inconsistent. In some verses it adopts nominal, historical translations while in others it takes adjectival ones. There’s no reason, in a hymn full of proper nouns, to suddenly translate kavir cāyamānaḥ as anything other than Kavi Cāyamāna. Verse 8 suggests that he’s an enemy to Sudās, and is possibly killed near the Paruṣṇī river. References in this verse to a parting of the river are taken as fantastic and mythological, but they refer to irrigated fields along the river- lines upon lines of ‘parted’ river-water. This situation is to be expected around the Paruṣṇī during Sudās’ era, when several mature Harappan settlements flourished in modern Punjab.

Verse 9 informs us of many enemies who came to the Paruṣṇī to contend against Sudās but failed, most of them never returning home. This verse is what leads to images of a grand battle between kings, the definitive Dāśarājña, but it’s only one part of Sudās’ many campaigns. Crucially for us, the verse refers to Sudās’ enemies as descendants of Manu and being of vadhrivācaḥ, or stultified-speech. Both elements are telling- Sudās’ enemies are part of the same culture as him, equal sons of Manu; and they speak not a foreign language but an impotent one, or devoid of the same dialect and inflections of Sudās’ people. It’s a sign that the Ṛgvedic people considered their dialect to be charged and sacred, while others spoke dialects shorn of this power. Verse 10 contains an uncertain name- Pṛśnigus- and there’s nothing to suggest their character.

Verse 11 has Sudās scatter a tribe called Vaikarṇas with Indra’s help. We know from Avestan tradition that the name of Vaikarṇa purohitas was Kavaṣa (Kauuaša in Avestan), and Kavaṣa features as a composer in maṇḍala 10 of the Ṛgveda. Verse 12 shows Sudās defeating Kavaṣas, Anus and Druhyus, and by now we have a fair picture of the Kavi tribe of Ānavas, or proto-Iranians. The name Kavi/Kavaṣa appears in Avestan tradition as Kauui, Kauuaša and Kauuiiān, and later Iranian kings styled themselves descendants of Kavi. Interesting things line up at this revelation. It gives us a clear identity for Kavi and Abhyāvartin Cāyamāna. In Divodāsa’s era, the proto-Iranians are placed between Paruṣṇī and Śatadru, and are allied to the Pūru-Bhāratas. By Sudās’ time they are pushed north and north-west, beyond the Sindhu, such that they are more in contact with other Ānava tribes and the Druhyus who preceded them in previous centuries. With them travel the names Pṛthu and Pārthava, and their longevity ensures the name Parthian is attested even in Greek times. Note also that the earliest Bhṛgu in Indian tradition was named Kavi, which supplements the intuition that Bhārgavas were initially Ānava priests.

Verse 13 confirms the direction of Sudās’ campaign when it has him attack fortified cities and strongholds- a situation that describes fortified settlements of the Sindhu from Rehman Dheri in the north to Mohenjodaro and Kot Diji in the south. Sudās’ defeat of Ānavas gives him control over all regions previously controlled by the Ānava descendants of Sivi Auśinara. That Sivi’s distant descendants migrate west, and are thus proto-Iranians, is affirmed in Avestan by the name Aošnara. Verse 13 also refers to Sudās’ victory over “Pūru of scornful speech,” though Griffith reads it as “scorned Pūru.” Either way it suggests a Pūru branch hostile to Sudās’ Tṛtsus, and must necessarily be associated with the Hastināpura Bhāratas descended from Ṛkṣa. This is supported by a break in their genealogy at this period after Saṁvaraṇa, and Paurāṇika tradition remembers the latter being lost in the forest for a thousand years after losing to a Pāñcāla king.

Verses 14 and 15 together confirm that these battles are not a case of pastoral semi-nomads attacking settled, urban people. Verse 14 tells us that it’s Ānavas and Druhyus who come seeking both cows and wealth, and that they do so in greater numbers than Sudās’ forces. Verse 15 reverses the direction and shows them fleeing their cities when Sudās attacks, leaving many provisions behind. We see here different political dynasties vying for control over the greater SSC, no clean divisions of good vs. evil or attacker vs. victim to be found. Verse 16 and 17 confirm that, despite greater numbers on the enemy side, Sudās achieves victories and pushes continually westward. He’s led here by Indra through many roads and passes, a situation that describes armies crossing the modern regions of Gilgit-Baltistan and Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa. After several uphill battles, great bounty is received by the victorious forces and much of it shared with the Vāsiṣṭhas.

Verses 18 and 19 shift the geography of the narrative and bring us to the Yamunā river, where Sudās defeats a ruler named Bheda and extracts tribute from Ajas, Śighras and Yakṣus. Some consider Yakṣu to be another rendition of Yadu, though this does not explain why Yadu wasn’t used instead in the verse. But the suggestion is in line with what we expect for the lower Yamunā during this era. This may or may not have happened before Sudās’ western campaigns. On the Ajas, we may note that Sudās comes some time after the era of Rāma, whose grandfather was named Aja. Could Ajas be a reference to the Aikṣvākus? Verse 20 praises Indra for past victories against Devaka and Śaṁbara, and verse 21 lists Parāśara, Śatayātu and Vasiṣṭha as ṛṣis aligned to Sudās. This Parāśara is not to be confused with the father of Veda Vyāsa of a later era. Verse 24 gives a final glimpse to the kind of empire Sudās may have built, for which mature Harappan is only another name. It’s suggested here that the empire is divided among vassal states, both east and west of the Sarasvatī. This is reminiscent not only of the federal structure evident in SSC, but also of the later mahājanapadas of India. A leader named Yudhyāmadhi resists this new federation, and it’s suggested that Sudās bests him in one-on-one combat. We should not read too much into a single line, but the ethic of larger battles being settled by one-on-one combats carries over to the Mahābhārata as well.

The word dāśarājña does not appear in hymn 7-18 at all, instead coming to us through hymn 7-83, which makes a few more references to Sudās’ battles. Here we find Pārthavas and Pārśavas hungry for cattle, and that Indra-Varuṇa helped Sudās defeat both Dāsas and Āryas (the Āryas again referring to Saṁvaraṇa and his clan of Bhāratas). We also see that in such battles both sides invoked deities like Indra and Varuṇa, but since only Sudās engaged in sacrifice the Devas favoured him. This again is evidence that the battles are between kindred people of a unified culture, and definitely not an Aryan invasion of/migration to Dravidian civilisation. Another reference to Sudās is in RV 1-112-19 by Kutsa Āṅgirasa, which tells us that the Aśvins brought for Sudās his wife. Verses such as this and 7-19-3, among others, are taken as proof that Trasadasyu was Sudās’ contemporary, but nothing really supports this claim. In RV 1-112 for example, Trasadasyu is mentioned in the same vein as past beneficiaries of the Aśvins are.

We see then that Sudās’ entire story is pretty much contained in a single hymn of the Ṛgveda- hymn 18 of maṇḍala 7. This makes it all the more remarkable how rich the hymn is not only on history but on the issue of PIE dispersal. Before we unravel this, let’s understand the concept of folk etymologies. Folk etymology refers to a change in the form of a word led by erroneous beliefs about its etymology. An example of this is Bogota, the capital city of Colombia. Folk etymology will have us believe that Bogota comes from Bhogāvaṭī, part of a larger hypothesis on the presence of Virocana, Bali and other Daityas in South America in prehistoric times. But a real analysis of the etymology of Bogota reveals that it stems from Bacata, a native name for the settlement that meant ‘walled farmland.’

A famous set of folk etymologies came from PN Oak, among whose claims were: England = Angulisthāna, Arabia = Arvasthāna, Rome = Rāma, Vatican = Veda Vātika and more. Not surprisingly, folk etymologies are easy to make. Even nuanced ones are, and one can be made up right now, see- the English word *dedication* is derived from Saṃskṛtam *dadhīcāsana*, itself a compound of Dadhīca and āsana. The ancient ṛṣi Dadhīca was famed for his penance and perseverance, his tapasyā. To assume Dadhīca’s āsana, or to commit to dadhīcāsana, meant committing oneself to perseverance, leading to the English word of dedication. This is of course absurd and unfounded, so it serves us well to be careful with folk etymologies. On the flipside, Bhṛgu = Phrygia is good etymology. We know that the Saṃskṛtam bha is represented by pha in Greek, so Bhṛgu will indeed be rendered as Phrygae or Phrygia. Ṛgvedic Saṃskṛtam makes no distinction between the ra and la sounds, so Bhṛgu also renders as Phleguai- who were fire-priests among the Greeks. We thus have a case where linguistic connections between Greek and Saṃskṛtam validate the etymology, and in both cultures the name is associated with fire-worship. This is an example of good etymology.

The above understood, let’s recapitulate a bit of PIE theory, according to which the historical PIE split into daughter languages in three waves. We are now in a position to make detailed commentary on each wave:

1. Split of proto-Anatolian and proto-Tocharian (3700-3300 BC): This happens after PIE, under Yayāti’s reign, migrates from the Gangetic Plains to the Sarasvatī-Dṛṣadvatī river systems. If Anatolian is sister to PIE, as some linguists suspect, then proto-Anatolian dispersed in the transition period between Pracetas Pārthavas and Vaivasvat Manu. Following Yayāti emerge the pañcajana- Anu, Druhyu, Yadu, Turvaśa and Pūru. The early rise of Pūrus and Yādavas drives this first wave of PIE dispersal, where critical dispersal events are under the reigns of Māndhātṛ, Purukutsa and Trasadasyu. Some stories during and immediately preceding this period, which pertain to Daitya-Āditya wars, could also be referring to related dispersal events. Inscriptional evidence of the Hittites (proto-Anatolians) suggests that they had Mongoloid features, which means they were among defeated Caraṇas, Uragas, Siddhas, Garuḍas and other possibly Mongoloid people known to Indian tradition. Talageri points to the cognacy between Tocharian and Uttarakuru to suggest that the latter refers to proto-Tocharian people, and placement of Uttarakuru in Paurāṇika geography adds up with this speculation.
2. Split of the European branches (proto-Italic, proto-Celtic, proto-Germanic, proto-Baltic and proto-Slavonic in 3300 BC-2600 BC): This begins with the reign of Sivi Auśinara in 3300 BC, under whose descendants the Ānavas colonise Punjab and Kashmir, thus pushing out the Druhyu tribes. This outward migration of the Druhyus is to be equated with dispersal of the European branches of IE languages. It clears the space for political consolidation in SSC, which is consequently occupied largely by Ānavas in the north and Yādavas in the south. No doubt Sagara’s campaigns against Kambojas, Yavanas, Śākas and other tribes refers to related dispersal events.

These Druhyus go on to populate the BMAC, bringing ‘Aryan’ language and culture to the location Nichols considers the PIE homeland. In reality this is the homeland of the European branches of IE languages, the second center of innovation in Tonoyan-Belyayev’s model. From here on, whatever happens to these languages will not affect PIE back in India- evidenced both in the borrowing of PIE words into Uralic but not vice versa, and in the absence of Dravidian influence in the European branches. From 3300 BC onwards, from this European IE homeland, populations migrating west form the Yamnaya and Corded Ware cultures. This journey can be traced by following the path of druhyu and cognate words.

To Talageri, druhyus were a class of priests or purohitas to the tribes that, owing to their distance from Pūrus and Ānavas, were assigned the same name. Thus the Ṛgvedic Druhyus are both a tribe and its chief purohitas. The three primary classes of ṛṣis then are Āṅgirasas (purohitas to Pūrus), Bhṛgus (purohitas to Ānavas) and Druhyus or Dasyus (purohitas to Druhyus/Dāsas). They share a common culture based around hymnology and fire-rituals, but each is of a specialised variety where the Āṅgirasas found the Ṛgvedic school of dialect, expression, hymnology and ritual. This is supported in the Ṛgveda, where Druhyus are mentioned alongside Bhṛgus as if they are the same category of people, and in the Avesta where Aṅgrā and Druj are mentioned together. The root travelled far, such that Celtic priests too were called drui or Druids, and their knowledge was transmitted orally for countless generations in a sacred dialect they preserved within an exclusive set. Celtic mythology features the goddesses Anu and Brigit, and the latter is associated with the maintenance of an eternal fire.

In Baltic and Slavonic languages, drui and cognate words are used to mean ‘friend,’ while in Germanic languages they mean ‘soldier.’ In either case the ancient status of druhyus as allied priests (with a possible martial character) is well affirmed. We can recall here Bhagawat’s concept of Bṛhaspatis as purohitas, or infantrymen, to the early Bhāratas. There is reason to imagine the early Ṛgvedic ṛṣis as warrior-priests. We can also see that these connections are not cases of folk etymology. There are phonetic, semantic and cultural connections between Ṛgvedic druhyus and Celtic druids, or between Bhṛgu and Brigit.

1. Split of the final branches (proto-Armenian, proto-Greek, proto-Albanian, proto-Iranian and proto-Indo-Aryan in 2800-2300 BC): To quote Talageri, “*the recorded evidence of the Ṛgveda has the last 5 (IE) branches in Punjab, on the Paruṣṇī’s banks*.” This indeed is attested in RV 7-18 alone, where we can visit these language groups one by one and examine their westward journey post the dāśarājña period. Talageri does not quote Tonoyan-Belyayev, but the former’s model maps remarkably well to the latter’s idea of archaic peripheries and innovative centers. Talageri finds Sudās’ many rival tribes migrating west. Those that reach the furthest retain their name and language, while those who stop midway are absorbed into later groups migrating out.

We can begin with the four names whose cognate connections are well accepted even by Witzel. These are Pākthas, Bhalānas, Pārśavas and Pārthavas. In Sudās’ era these four tribes are placed in modern Punjab, on the Sindhu’s eastern tributaries. The dāśarājña campaigns force a westward migration among them, and the Parśus and Pṛthus migrate the furthest, such that in later eras they are attested as Persians and Parthians. Pākthas and Bhalānas migrate not too far out, and even today they’re known to us as the Pakhtuns and Balochis. For thousands of years these people have been custodians of the two great gateways to India, the Bolan (Bhalāna) and Khyber Passes.

Once the above four are accepted, it becomes a matter of intellectual honesty whether to accept connections for the other names among Sudās’ enemies, all contained in the same hymn. The Śimyus and Alinas travelled the furthest, forming a trail of proto-Greek, proto-Albanian and proto-Armenian migrations that stretch from modern Afghanistan/Iran to Europe. The Śimyus that reached the furthest were attested in Roman records as Sarmatians, those absorbed midway appear in Albanian as Sirmio, and those that migrated only till Iran are remembered by the Avesta as Sairima. Similarly, the Alinas to reach furthest were the Alans of Roman records, and to be absorbed midway were the Greek Hellenes. Bhṛgus reached Turkey as the Phrygians, and Dāsas reached Romania as the Dacians or remained in Iran/Afghanistan as the Dahae/Dahi. The Śivas are attested in Ukraine as Khivas and the Viṣaṇins could relate to Piśācins. It’s not just such names that travelled. A 14th century BC vessel found in Armenia is clearly imprinted with the svastika symbol. Beyond fundamental connections seen in the Ṛgveda, evidence continues to mount from all fields that what Indian tradition maintains about its history has been right all along.

Talageri confesses the connection between Viṣaṇins and Piśācins to be speculative. He supports it with evidence of the conversion of va to pa and of na to cha (as in from Bhalāna to Balochi). This may be tenuous as he concedes, but there’s no sound reason not to notice the clear imprint of IE migrations from India towards Europe in the names of the other tribes (especially when the journeys for Pārśus, Pṛthus, Pākthas and Bhalānas are accepted). Objections to Talageri’s observations come from the same quarters that find Meluhha = Mleccha, Sandrocottus = Candragupta and Mahāpadma = Xandrames to be perfectly acceptable.

It’s important to internalise the implication of these connections. To say that the early Bhārgavas like Jamadagni were Pārśavas is not akin to saying that they were Iranians. Rather the opposite direction is true. Jamadagni and his Pārśava tribe was placed well within India, and only later did their descendants migrate to lands known as Persia. Together, the Pṛthupārśavos represent proto-Iranians, and their placement in Punjab before Iran is a critical nail in the AIT coffin and the PIE argument. This is why Western academia prefers translations of the Ṛgveda that inexplicably erase names like Kavi Cāyamāna and Pṛthupārśavos from the translation. Doing so erases the rich history that the Ṛgveda contains, and from a reputationist point of view its damning evidence on the PIE debate is better tucked under adjectival interpretations that over-intellectualise Saṃskṛtam translation.

Let’s also be clear that the above dispersals happened with the emigration of royal, primarily male lineages in Druhyus, Ānavas and others. This is explicit in the era of Sagara, where the Kambojas, Śākas and others he exiles are royal survivors. Entire populations did not move, and the royalty that reached far shores mixed into local lineages in a few generations. This is evidenced by the presence of Uśīnaras alongside Kuru-Pāñcālas even in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa and Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad, which are later texts that prove Ānava descendants continued to live in India even as their cousins migrated away.

But PIE dispersed through what Driem calls the father-tongue model. In this model of elite dominance, males of a foreign population marry into local women, who raise their children in their father-tongues, or the language of the foreigner males. The Hittites were undoubtedly such a royalty, for they were quickly localised but names of deities like Indara and Maruttas lingered. It happened in India too, millennia later. A traceable few of us have Turkic or Arabian genes, but after centuries of elite Turkic males establishing imperial dynasties and marrying local women, names like Babur and Taimur have survived in India to this day along with the religion of a foreign import. Not that this is problematic per se, we should hasten to add. The reference is made for historical comparison, and the pattern we refer to is of male populations leaving their imprint on base populations they conquer or dominate for a while.

From the point-of-view of a European interest in the Ṛgveda, the PIE story is complete with Sudās. His reign pushes outwards various Dāsa/Ānava tribes over the Western Silver/Lapis Lazuli and Northern Birch/Cattle migration routes, established by proto versions of Anatolian, Tocharian, Italic, Germanic, Celtic, Baltic and Slavonic languages when they dispersed in past waves. The Indian interest however continues, for Indo-Iranian occupies a shared space for a few more generations after Sudās. Paurāṇika genealogies give us Sahadeva and Somaka as his son and grandson, respectively. But Talageri asserts that there’s a space of at least a few generations between Sudās and Sahadeva. This is likely true for a variety of reasons.

We should notice that by Sahadeva’s era the Bhārata purohita is an Āṅgirasa again, while for Sudās the role was performed by a Vāsiṣṭha. A change in the favoured purohita could happen in a single generation, but not the complete preponderance of one school in the Ṛgvedic hymns over another. Sahadeva and Somaka are contemporary to Vāmadeva Gautama, who as primary composer of maṇḍala 4 suggests some distance from Vasiṣṭha Maitrāvaruṇi of maṇḍala 7. Structurally the Ṛgveda does not change much between the two books, though Vāmadeva’s poems are of exceptional elegance and sonority- representing an evolution in Ṛgvedic hymnology and evidence that Vāmadeva operated in a school with evolved conditions. Either way, Indo-Iranian exchange (or Pūru-Ānava) in the Ṛgveda persists till the era of Sahadeva and his son Somaka.

The exchange is referred to as the Vārṣāgira battle, though it appears not so much a battle as a peace treaty. Sudās’ era represents the Bhārata expansion across modern Punjab up to the Sindhu’s northern reaches, the convergence of Sothi-Siswal with Ravi-Phase into mature Harappan. Sahadeva’s represents the expansion of empire at the lower reaches. He covers the Bolan Pass- the inclusion of Kot Diji-Phase into mature Harappan. He also strikes an alliance with Yādavas and Turvaśas, who in Sudās’ era were enemies. These are represented in verses 17 and 18 of RV 4-30 by Vāmadeva.

Verse 17 lauds Indra for bringing Yādavas and Turvaśas to safety from the far shores. This confirms both to be coastal people, the Yādavas through modern Gujarat and the latter through India’s entire eastern coastline. Verse 18 mentions the defeat of Ārya kings Arṇa and Citraratha beyond the Sarayū river. This finally is mention of a Sarayū outside India. Ānavas migrating out since Sudās’s era, previously married into Aikṣvākus through Daśaratha, have carried the name in their dialect as Harayū. Arṇa and Citraratha do not appear at this time in Paurāṇika genealogy, though the –ratha suffix does begin to appear in Kuru names soon. We can speculate that these Ārya kings are from Ṛkṣa’s line.

The name Vārṣāgira emerges from five personalities named in RV 1-100-17 by Kutsa Āṅgirasa. They are Ṛjrāśva, Aṁbarīṣa, Surādhas, Sahadeva and Bhayamāna. The following verse names Dasyus and Śimyus as their defeated enemies. Talageri argues that Surādhas, given that it means the same thing as Sudās, is by this time a common epithet for descendants of Sudās. This is supported by hymns in maṇḍala 3, where Viśvāmitra Gāthina refers to Sudās as Surādhas. Talageri reads Surādhas in RV 1-100-17 as Somaka, Sahadeva’s son. These in themselves are not remarkable observations. They are made pertinent for Indo-Iranian history by noticing a near parallel account in Iranian tradition.

The Avesta records the Vārṣāgira negotiation as one with a leader of the Turanian side named Arjāspa, a clear reference to Ṛjrāśva. The Iranians self-appellation was Airya, and they referred to their enemies as Tuirya. The occurrence of an Ārya figure named Turāyana in the Ṛgveda suggests that Tuirya was the Iranian name for Ṛgvedic Āryas, much like the latter referred to the former as Dāsas. Avestan testimony doesn’t stop here. It mentions Humayāka as Arjāspa’s brother, clearly Somaka. E Sheheriarji translates Humayāka to mean the same as Suradhās, which gives us a separate line of evidence. A later Iranian text called Shahnama names Hushdiv as another ally of Arjāspa, which even if not rendered into Avestan Hazadaeva is a clear reference to Sahadeva.

What we have here is a case of one historical incident remembered by both sides, and found in their texts with clearly the same names involved. Three of the five Vārṣāgiras named in the Ṛgveda are found directly in Iranian tradition, and two of them are the descendants of Sudās. Congruences do exist for the remaining two. Sheheriarji points out that the names of Arjāspa’s other brothers, Vidarafshnik and Vandaremaini, translate to mean the same thing as Aṁbarīṣa and Bhayamāna respectively- ‘one with beautiful garments’ and ‘fearless one.’ Hodiwala expresses skepticism for an approach that links names using their literal meanings. But when we see how Indigenous American names are rendered in modern English, it becomes plausible that Iranian traditions remembered Aṁbarīṣa and Bhayamāna by their literal renditions. Just like how an Indigenous American name might today read as ‘The One With A Horse’s Speed’. In any case, both Iranian and Indian traditions refer unambiguously to three out of the five Vārṣāgira names, and are obviously talking about the same event.

As Elst puts it, “*In the Vedic account, it does indeed conclude the period of conflict. Bhārata expansionism into Afghanistan seems to have been overstretched, and subsequent generations left it to the Iranians: Good fences make good neighbours. This way, the battle ushers in a period of peaceful coexistence forming the setting of books 2, 5 and 8*.” The borders that Vārṣāgiras negotiated in the Ṛgveda would hold for thousands of years, forming a perennial fence between India and Iran and creating a region of cultural exchange in modern Afghanistan. This is where Darius and Cyrus would consider the end of their empire, and from where Alexander would look to the Sindhu and vie for more. The ‘good fence’ would break only in 1947 AD, when a part of India would be cut into Pakistan and inserted between India and Iran. Today, Pakistan proudly proclaims 5,000 years of history in its tourism brochures, while the fence contains hotbeds of global terrorism that have all but destroyed archaeological evidence of this history.

The Vārṣāgira account also throws new light on the chronology of Zarathuštra, the founding figure of Zoroastrianism. In the Avesta, Zarathuštra’s patron named Vištāspa is in battle against Arjāspa, or Ṛjrāśva. There are happy congruences here. Kavi Vištāspa is the full name of Zarathuštra Spitāma’s patron, and it links us to Kavi Cāyamāna who was a rival to Sudās. This allows us to date Zarathuštra to the 3rd millennium BC, more in line with Iranian tradition as compared to the scholarly date of 6th century BC.  From an Indian point of view, the Vārṣāgira negotiation marks the final event in formation of Bhāratavarṣa proper, though it will not be called so for a few more generations. We understand this better once Ṛgvedic and Paurāṇika testimonies are reconciled with archaeology.