---
title: suhotra atithina
sno: 63
---

As mentioned earlier, the genealogy after Bharata is extremely discrepant. Some accounts have five sons born from Vidathin with the names Suhotra, Śunahotra, Nara, Garga and Ṛjiśvan, who are together called Bhāradvājas. This is projection from a later era, for the historical Bharadvāja hasn’t emerged yet. The line immediately after Vidathin was both Bhārata and Bārhaspatya, not Bhāradvāja. Other accounts place Bhuvamanyu and Bṛhatkṣatra between Vidathin and Suhotra. Yet another has Hastina born before Suhotra, which disagrees with most others. Recall that this period shows ambiguity for the Aikṣvāku line as well, perhaps indicating a general breakdown in genealogical record-keeping. We should expect this if the period is of several royal conflicts that lead to PIE-dispersals.

In Tonoyan-Belyayev’s model of PIE dispersal, the period 3300-2600 BC represents the dispersal of proto-Italic, proto-Celtic, proto-Germanic, proto-Baltic and proto-Slavic. SSC matures over the same period, hinting to us that as one political power ushered civilisation in northern India, the others were pushed outwards. Ānavas and Pūrus dominated the early period, but by 2800 BC it’s the Bhāratas who emerge as rulers of the SSC. The Ṛgveda makes no mention of Suhotra, likely because dynastic Bhāratas are yet to arise and when they do, they allude only to their immediate ancestors or the eponymous patriarch. If we take Suhotra’s reputation as cakravartin at face value, we ought to assume that he perpetrated further consolidation of the Sarasvatī-Dṛṣadvatī river system. Though material synthesis begins to emerge between Ravi and Sothi-Siswal cultures, true Harappan civilisation is still a few centuries away. This complements Ṛgvedic evidence, where Bhāratas are not brought to the Sindhu’s eastern tributaries till the era of Sudās.

Contemporary to Suhotra, the Yādavas by this period have taken over the Nāgas of Ānarta and converted their city to Dvārakā. They are no doubt the SSC people who establish port cities such as Dholavira and Lothal. Their linkages with cities of northern SSC are explained by the close connections between Ātreyas, Āṅgirasas, Bhārgavas and others. Archaeological connections are seen through common weights and measures, town planning features, agricultural patterns and architectural features. These are built atop base knowledge systems- climate, mathematics, geometry, astronomy, metallurgy, agricultural science and more. These knowledge systems have long been consolidated and transmitted in India by ṛṣis, or the magician-shamans of old, the civilisation-builders when the idea of nations didn’t exist.

At places such as Kot Diji, conflagration levels that could indicate military attacks are noticed between 2800-2400 BC, which maps with Bhārata expansions across the Sindhu-Sarasvatī plains. But these conflicts are not directed against some Yādava clans, who with their control of sites like Ahar and Balathal are crucial allies for access to copper. In the early Ṛgvedic period, Yādavas are frequently mentioned as allies coming from afar, and prayers are given to ensure their safe passage across rivers. We talk here of plausible candidates for political power, not for complete demographics of the SSC. Our vision of history gets sharper by the time of Divodāsa Bhārata. Neither he nor Sudās feature in the cakravartin list, for reasons that will be clear by this chapter’s conclusion.

The traditional account of Suhotra adds up archaeologically if we place him around 2800 BC. Following the establishment of kingdom by Bharata two centuries ago, this is the final integration wave that will produce peak Mature Harappan by 2500 BC. We should expect prosperity, consolidation and relatively fewer conflicts, precisely what the Mahābhārata mentions for Suhotra. His is a period of great prosperity, his army consisting of elephants, horses, chariots and abundant infantrymen. The kingdom is prosperous both with crops and cattle, and the people live as well as does their ruler- again a situation conforming to archaeological evidence. We’re also told that he married an Aikṣvāku princess, and this marks a period of growing contact between the Bhārata and Sāgara dynasties. The period following 2800 BC in the Upper Doab (Yamunā-Gaṅgā) has isolated findings of OCP culture, confirming that Sagara’s OCP and Bharata’s SSC were beginning to find common ground. This is attested in agriculture too, especially if we paint the broad stroke of rice as the OCP crop and barley as the SSC crop. Modern Pratapgarh attests to barley cultivation by 2500 BC, and in Haryana/Punjab rice arrives between 2800-2600 BC. These are simplistic speculations, and under a larger picture must be reconciled with other lines of evidence, such as the presence of proto-barley in the Tibetan Plateau from many millennia prior.