---
title: tarakasura and a proto mahabharata
sno: 30
---

Mainstream Indology likes to dismiss the Mahābhārata war as a tale completely ahistorical. It only represents a skirmish that might have happened in northern India at some point in the 2nd millennium BC, and later writers added layers of embellishment and fictionalisation to create what we know as the Mahābhārata. Support for this is pulled from the fact that Vyāsa originally wrote a smaller tale titled Jaya. His disciple added more to create a tale called Vijaya, and yet another disciple added more verses when he narrated Vijaya, creating the final form of the Mahābhārata. In one interpretation, the Battle of Ten Kings alluded to in the Ṛgveda was the inspiration for the later fictionalisation of Mahābhārata. But we must be intellectually honest. The Ṛgveda is frustratingly meagre on details of the Battle of Ten Kings. It gives next to nothing to the aspiring fiction writer. Instead the creative Indian of 2000 BC could have turned to the Tārakāsura war, the Deva-Asura equivalent of a Mahābhārata. Following Indra’s killing of Vṛtra, the Daityas and Dānavas search for a new leader to lead them back to their former glory. Enter Tāraka, a descendant of Danu.

In Tāraka we get the first tangible way to locate Daityas geographically. We’re told he performs intense penance in the Pariyātra mountains, equivalent to the modern Vindhyās. Following this he resolves to wage war on the Ādityas, and appoints ten great commanders-in-chief to assemble the combined Dānava-Daitya forces. The description that follows indicates a war of massive proportions, one that pulls into tenure all the major and minor tribes of the time- Daityas, Dānavas, Ādityas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras, Kimpuruṣas, Piśācas and more. Quite like the Mahābhārata allowed no one to abstain in later India, the Tārakāsura war allows no neutrality in early India.

The geographical allusions must not be taken too literally though. For one, we talk of nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes which obviously ranged across a wide geography. This explains why Ādityas, Daityas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Apsarās and other tribes are found across Central and South Asia, or Jambūdvīpa, in the early eras. Secondly the placements might well be projections from later eras, where a ṛṣi placed on the Gaṅgā’s banks recompiled the story to feature within his locale. But that this was a period rife with bloody strife is unmistakable. Human populations were in varying states of nomadic, semi-nomadic and rural living. They were learning to yoke the earth and husband the animal, yielding resources that were undoubtedly attractive even to the most ‘primitive’ tribes.

We are given vivid descriptions of the sheer scale and terror of war, air rended with the sound of conches, war drums, musical instruments and elephant calls alike. Weapons as varied as lances, clubs, slings, axes, javelins, spears, mallets, discuses, darts and arrows are brought into service (swords, helmets and armour are not mentioned). The battlefields are described as feeding grounds for crows, jackals and vultures, and entire rivers turn red with blood. Great individual battles are played out much like they are in the Mahābhārata. The battle between the respective commanders-in-chief, Yama of the Ādityas and Gṛṣaṇa of the Daityas, resembles the one between Bhīma and Duryodhana millennia later. Similarly does Kubera of the Yakṣas battle Jambhu the Asura, and those who constantly seek ethnic and racial colours in Indian history should note that in this prehistoric battle the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas fought on the Āditya side. Viṣṇu is as instrumental in this war as Kṛṣṇa is in the Mahābhārata. He takes on several different enemy commanders, marshalls the Rudras into a formidable infantry, and advises Śatakratu Indra at many instances on the best way forward. It’s difficult not to associate the Paurāṇika description of Viṣṇu and Indra in this war with that of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. Once the maṇḍala is well identified, you see its fractals everywhere.

It’s likely the Tārakāsura war conflates several different conflicts, themselves the continuation of an ongoing war for supremacy between the Daityas and Ādityas. After major Daitya warlords such as Gṛṣaṇa, Kālanemi and Jambhu are defeated, the Daitya king Tāraka himself steps into battle. He takes on significant rivals- Hutasa (an Agni), Maruta (a Vāyu), Yama, Varuṇa, Dhanada, Nirṛti, Garuḍa, Vahni (another Agni) and bests them all. It’s hinted that his capital is near the Mahānadī delta, another confirmation of the early Daitya geography. It aligns with what we know from genetics- that post the Holocene early populations from south India migrated along the eastern coast to modern Orissa and West Bengal. No doubt some of the mtDNA and yDNA here belonged to Daityas.

After defeating the Āditya rivals, Tāraka claims rule over the Daitya-Āditya-Dānava people and returns to his capital. To the positions hitherto occupied by Ādityas he appoints his own henchmen. Nimi occupies the position of Vahni, the chief officiator of fire-rituals. Kālanemi is made Yama, officiator of civil and tribal disputes. Mahiṣāsura becomes Varuṇa, upholder of the tribal law. This indicates to us that all Ādityas are actually positions or titles, and none of the names are historical personalities. We could speculate that the Ādityas were the ministerial cabinet to Daitya monarchs, and ambition for power frequently rose among the former such that it led to major battles and wars.

As they do across history, the defeated Ādityas appeal to the one tribe that can turn the tide in their favour. This would be the Rudras, then under the leadership of Śaṅkara. Though old, Śaṅkara is still a formidable warrior and will indeed fight for the Ādityas. But a new generation is to dawn in the great ongoing war, and Śaṅkara’s son is to lead the war effort. Skanda, or Subrahmaṇya, or Kārtikeya is crowned the new Indra, leader of the Ādityas. Great Āditya veterans declare their support for him, and patriarchs such as Tvaṣṭṛ and Pūṣāṇa arrive at his coronation to offer the services of men under their command. A new force is thus assembled and under Skanda the Indra’s leadership they march at Tāraka’s capital. We are told that this army’s approach is south-west. If Tāraka’s capital is near the Mahānadī delta, Skanda’s path brings him from north-east, near modern Tibet or further north. This is consistent with tradition which usually places the Rudras between Meru plateau and the Tibet basin. A great war ensues in which Skanda kills Tāraka and establishes Āditya supremacy.

But the hostility is not over, and many consequent Daitya/Āditya generations are still fated for war. A generation later the new Rudra, a Śiva, is called into service to destroy the three capitals of Tārakāsura’s sons, commonly called Tripura. Śiva’s burning of the Daitya cities is remembered as the Traipura war among Devas and Asuras. This alludes to early conflicts between nomadic and urbanising populations. Settled cities with agriculture and cattle would obviously have been attractive to semi-nomadic tribes, and raids that stole urban resources are frequently attested in Indian literature. The Traipura War suggests that Daityas were ahead on the race to civilisation, while Āditya-Rudra conglomerates envied this development. The pattern recurs throughout Indian history. Daityas are the elder tribes in lead while Ādityas only periodically catch up, through miraculous interventions by Mahāviṣṇu or Mahāśiva.