---
title: time and depth perception
sno: 38
---

Born to Agnidhra, eldest son of Priyavrata, was Nābhi. This Nābhi fathered a mysterious and venerated figure of Indian tradition- Ṛṣabhadeva. To the Paurāṇika tradition found in Bhagavata Purāṇa, he is listed among twenty-four avatāras of Viṣṇu. To the Liṅga Purāṇa he was an avatāra of Śiva. And to Jain tradition, he was the first tīrthāṅkara and considered the same as Ikṣvāku, founder of the Aikṣvāku dynasty that much later birthed Rāma. Dr. Radhakrishnan found Ṛṣabha the tīrthāṅkara’s name in the Yajurveda, and also considered the Bhagavata Purāṇa to endorse his status as the first tīrthāṅkara. As conflicting as these accounts appear, they paint a common picture of macro-historical importance. We cannot be sure about the degree of Ṛṣabha’s historicity, nor assign to him any plausible chronology, but that he represents a significant era in Indian memory is undoubted. This is reiterated to us when we are told of his son- Bharata.

At the very root of our nation’s name sits a conflict in tradition. The Bhagavata Purāṇa declares that Bhāratavarṣa received its name from this Bharata, son of Ṛṣabhadeva, and agrees here with Jain tradition- which refers to him as cakravartin. But the Mahābhārata says that Bhārata came from Bharata, the son of Duṣyanta (a much later personality). What are we to do with such ambiguity, which to the historian presents a case to dismiss the whole affair as mythological anyway?

The answer lies in using the insider-lens, not the outsider-lens. The answer lies in asking- how does it matter? What is the message being given to us? Whether the son of Ṛṣabha or the son of Duṣyanta, what is it that our ancestors wanted us to learn about Bharata? And what were they trying to tell us by tracing the origins of our nation’s name to him? Both Bharatas are presented to us as models of resolve, piety, imperialism and equanimity- all and more. Both are called cakravartins, and both are said to have conquered vast territories. But both are shown to be men who conducted themselves in accordance with dharma, and men who used their power and position not for personal glory but for collective prosperity. Most importantly- both knew when to retire and to move on to the next phase of their lives. We will hear later of personalities that did not possess this sense of balance, like Yayāti for example. Perhaps that’s why our nation is called Bhārata, and not Yāyāti.

This point highlights the difference between history as India remembers it, and history as the West would have it described. It is true- Indians are ahistorical. This is why we did not care for the ambiguity between Bharatas, nor for a certain date for either of them. But equally is it true- Indians are deeply historical. We cared what examples our luminaries set. We cared for who we should remember and why we should remember them. Whichever Bharata we prefer, we laud him not for Alexander-esque conquests, not for Timur-ian invasions and bloodshed, nor even for ‘spreading Hinduism’ beyond the borders of his native lands. We laud him for upholding dharma, for respecting the *traditio* of his ancestors, for embodying in himself the conduct, resolve and temperance that is required not just of humans in general but of leaders in specific. In fact, as we will later see, there is little laudation in Indian historical memory for outright conquerors and imperialists. These were not the deeds that brought glory to our ancestors, even if no doubt many indulged in them. This is how we understand a civilisation’s self-description, its organic will to form a unified whole. We will come to this matter once again, when we discuss a man who for thousands of years has been venerated in India and beyond, but who modern historians (with their deep expertise and authority) like to call a misogynistic pig.

Having understood this context, we may now examine the first Bharata, son of Ṛṣabhadeva. Recall here his ancestry, emerging from Priyavrata’s eldest son Agnidhra, and that Agnidhra’s line is said to have inherited the land of Bhāratavarṣa. The Bhagavata Purāṇa declares that prior to Bharata, this land was instead named Ajanābhavarṣa, and it’s Bharata’s deeds that lent his name to Ajanābhavarṣa. His imperial exploits, his status as a cakravartin, and his rivalry with his brother Bahubali are detailed in Jain tradition. In this tradition, he is heralded as the first law-giver and is said to have created the brāhmin varṇa in addition to the existing three that his father had created. Tellingly, the role of this varṇa was to meditate, learn, teach and search for knowledge. We also get a hint on political geography when we learn of Bharata’s brothers in the Bhagavata Purāṇa- Kuśāvarta, Ilāvarta, Brahmāvarta, Malaya, Ketu, Vidarbha, Kīkaṭa and more. These names might be retroactive additions, but placed alongside the Bharata of Bhāratavarṣa they suggest that some regional/national/ethnic identities of deep antiquity were already established in his time. Kuśāvarta was the name for modern Iran, Ilāvarta for (broadly) the Gangetic Plains, and Brahmāvarta eventually became known as Āryavarta. The other names- Malaya, Ketu, Vidarbha and Kīkaṭa too represent tribal and regional collectives.

This unresolvable ambiguity between the two Bharatas gains another dimension when we realise that both the Purāṇas and the Mahābhārata are attributed to one man- Veda Vyāsa. Why would Vyāsa tell us that the name Bhārata comes from the son of Ṛṣabha in the Bhagavata Purāṇa, and then in the Mahābhārata say that it comes from the son of Duṣyanta? To understand fully we will have to get into the mind and context of Veda Vyāsa, and we have a lot of time to traverse before we get there. For now, let us remember that the story of Indian civilisation is the account of a fractal maṇḍala, of the same essential truths embedded into every layer such that they form a cohesive whole. Viewed this way, we can see that the case of two Bharatas is a way for our ancestors to sharpen our focus more on the lessons of history than on the descriptions of events. Further, it’s a way for Veda Vyāsa to reiterate the ancient, continuing and sanātana nature of our civilisation. Before every ‘first king’ is another, before every propounder of yoga and dharma was a prior guru, and before all the wisdom we may muster today stands the collective wisdom of our ancestors.