# true “aryan” history

Index: 2.5
S. No: 9
Type: 📑 manuscript

While linguists such as Mallory-Adams concede that no certainties can be assigned regarding the PIE homeland, we must consider the psychological reason why out-of-India theories appear distasteful or motivated.

Of all possible locations for the PIE homeland, India is the only place where the posited source culture survives. Anatolian homeland theories have no modern Anatolians to speak on their behalf. Ancient horse-riders from the Pontic Steppe do not appear on the academic landscape to argue for a Steppe homeland. When Maria Gimbutas speaks of the Kurgan hypothesis or Colin Renfrew of Anatolian origins we are a priori assured that there’s no nationalism and/or chauvinism at play. Only in the case of India, owed to the continuity of its civilisation, can there be Indians still following some kind of Aryan culture and arguing for an Indian homeland- both. Modern sensibilities are obviously alerted to subjectivity and bias. When a Shrikant Talageri or Subhash Kak speak of Indian origins to PIE we are conditioned to suspect mischief. But for a Talageri there’s an Elst, for a Kak there’s Kazanas, Frawley and Semenenko, and before a Muller was a Voltaire. Why do these people place the homeland in India, in all violation of the principle that the homeland is usually near the author’s native land?

When we look beyond this filter and consider the Indian-homeland scenario with an open mind, we find little that actually refutes it linguistically and a whole lot that affirms it archaeologically and textually. As was previously detailed, some linguists now think Anatolian was a sister language to PIE, and before proto-Anatolian-PIE existed Nostratic. Remarkably alike to how we talk of hominid species, we can talk of language families and evolution only in broad periods with no possible hard dates for the birth/split of lineages. Talageri’s analysis is correct because it takes the Ṛgvedic picture as it appears- various IE-speaking tribes in a state of conflict, which in phases triggers outward migrations. Of course, as is suggested by linguistic family trees, the ancestors of these people would have spoken PIE. But that the Ṛgveda shows a post-PIE state is not Talageri’s fault. What the reputationists cannot digest is Talageri’s conclusions from internal chronology- that the Ṛgvedic people moved east-to-west, implying that the hypothesised PIE homeland is to the east of Sarasvatī, not to its west.

While there is no consensus on precise timelines or waves, three broad dispersal events/periods are accepted for PIE:

1. Dispersal of Anatolian and Tocharian, in that order. But Anatolian likely dispersed much earlier, such that some linguists think it was sister to PIE and not daughter. Remember- we do not really know when PIE became Anatolian. Did Anatolian arise at the PIE homeland and migrate to its geographically attested location, did PIE migrate there and birth Anatolian, or did Anatolian originate somewhere between the home and final lands? Answers to this are not at all neat for any language.
2. Dispersal of Italic, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic and Slavic. This implies that after Anatolian and Tocharian separated from PIE it continued to evolve for a period of time before these family groups originated. The PIE that Anatolian dispersed from is obviously very different to the PIE these languages disperse from.
3. Dispersal of Albanian, Greek, Armenian, Iranian and Indo-Aryan. Again implying that PIE continued to evolve after previous families separated. Clearly after the previous dispersals we must speak of a kind of post-PIE, because it’s not the PIE that Anatolian separated from. And what happened to PIE after this stage? Once all language families were birthed, where did PIE itself go?

This last point is important on the Aryan question. PIE was preceded by a mother language of some kind, would have existed alongside sister languages, and interacted with foreign languages. Why do we assume that all of PIE-related culture and religion originated within a single window of time, under PIE speaking people? The PIE cultural kit obviously would have inherited a lot from its mother and evolved through interactions with sisters and foreigners. Part of PIE culture thus originated from somewhere outside the PIE homeland- wherever the homeland of its mother was. The mother’s culture in turn inherited elements from the grandmother’s homeland. Linguists are right when they tell us that the PIE theory is scientifically correct. They self-aggrandise when they insist that this science can tell us everything about people, culture, religions, lifestyles, practices and migrations.

The best that any PIE homeland scenario can linguistically posit is a situation that offers compatible dispersal events, and both Talageri and Tonoyan-Belyayev articulate this out of India with great detail. The placement of PIE daughters in the PIE homeland before their dispersal is not a negation of the linguistic hypothesis like Fournet considers it to be. The true PIE story is that its homeland covered modern Pakistan, eastern Iran, Afghanistan and northern India. Given the range of PIE lexicon that Mallory-Adams detail on flora, fauna, climate and geography we must assume that the PIE homeland covered a wide base. The lexicon suggests a Neolithic population that’s familiar with agriculture, animal husbandry, settled living in wattle-and-daub structures, as well as semi-nomadic and pre-rural cultural states.

PIE chronologies are thrown into disarray when archaeological evidence is considered. In Anatolia as well as Indo-Iran, the Neolithic transition to animal husbandry and agriculture is evidenced in the 7th and 6th millennia BC. Does this indicate that PIE was spoken then? Or was it pre-PIE? Or pre-Anatolian-PIE? Or Nostratic as some linguists propose? Should we really let linguists and hypothesised languages dictate all history? If we do, why is it that no German, French or Italian book exists with the title ‘Which of Us are Aryans’? The reality is that even if we point to one location on the map and call it the PIE homeland, linguistics cannot conclusively say that PIE did not exist at that time in any neighbouring location. Before Indo-Aryan is pre-Indo-Iranian, before which is PIE, preceded by pre-Anatolian-PIE, and before that a Nostratic in the hypothesised family tree.

The gravitational center of languages thus has shifted over time, across the span of human inhabitation. In a broad correlation with genetic movements, languages have followed human migrations and evolved in a multi-faceted wave-like manner. There might have been a time when human tribes migrated from the Fertile Crescent to the Indian subcontinent, a time when the converse happened, and periods where both happened simultaneously. Some journeys would have made a lasting linguistic and genetic impact while others not. Colin Renfrew’s Anatolian hypothesis places PIE in around 7000 BC, while the Nostratic theory championed by Allan Bomhard places Nostratic around the same time in the same location. PIE experts place its split in around 3500 BC, long after Renfrew’s suggestion. When we see these problems resolved by positing pre-languages and post-languages of all degrees hypothetical, we must realise that history is not the domain of linguistics. More importantly, the subjective felt-experience of our civilisation is not the domain of ‘history’ borne from the Western subjective felt-experience.

Reputationists criticise this line of attack. They believe pointing out to uncertainties and inner debates in the field is akin to dismissing the field, which is clearly not the case. Any number of debates abound in physics regarding the origin of our universe, and the 2020 Nobel physics laureate Roger Penrose has speculated that there was something before the Big Bang. This allows us to be skeptical of current physics’ models of origin, but that does not mean we dismiss physics entirely. Such is the case with linguistics as well. Throwing the baby out with the bathwater is not the revisionist’s playbook at all but the reputationists’, which is why the Purāṇas are never brought to bear on Indian history by them. In the case of India we know that agriculture and animal husbandry are indigenous. We know also that it was, as it still is, a demographic heavyweight throughout history. Historically recent incursions into India by Scythians, Greeks, Hunas, Mongols and Turks overshadow the weighty record of population groups migrating out from the fertile and populated Sindhu-Sarasvatī-Gaṅgā plains in prehistory. Indian tradition readily attests to the flow of nomadic populations throughout the 8th-4th millennia BC. Any number of these scenarios lend themselves to Nostratic and PIE homeland speculations.

We must therefore focus on the primary meaning of Ārya and the implication of AIT- that Vedic culture and Saṃskṛtam were foreign imports into India. If our focus reveals an out-of-India PIE scenario then so be it. Of all the Eurasian probables for a PIE homeland, India happens to be the only one supported by a mounting body of archaeological and textual evidence. All of PIE flora, fauna and geography are compatible with valid Saṃskṛtam words, and PIE climate, material culture and kinship are compatible with parts of India in 7000-3000 BC. Saṃskṛtam is thus indigenous to this land. Even if its ancestor came from abroad, over a longer period that ancestor was anyway varyingly proto-Indo-European, proto-Anatolian-PIE, Nostratic or a yet to be hypothesised pre/post-something. And given that we talk of several millennia, linguistic gravitational and dispersal centers would have obviously shifted. The linguistic event horizon itself does not go beyond the last 10,000 odd years, prior to which no reasonable linguistic hypothesis is possible. But that language, culture, ethnicity and genetics have far deeper routes should be obvious to all. Funnily enough, the historical landscape beyond the linguistic horizon, which is now being revealed by genetics, finds echoes in the Indian tradition academia has always ignored- the Purāṇas.

The Ṛgvedic evidence is of course unmistakable. The people who composed Ṛgvedic hymns lived near the Sarasvatī’s banks, which correspond roughly to modern Delhi, Haryana and western UP including parts of Punjab and Rajasthan at the periphery. Even if we imagine that their ancestors once roamed the Steppe (we have no evidence to do so) the concepts, ideas and events expressed in the Ṛgveda decidedly happen within this geography. And these are the people, along with proto-Iranians, who call themselves Aryans. Maybe they carry ancestry of some “Iranian Agriculturalists” from 7000 BC. Maybe they have other genetic strains yet to be discovered. They spoke a form of archaic Saṃskṛtam which originated in this land, though of course this Saṃskṛtam was the post-something of a pre-something-language.

Whether it was spoken in 1500 BC or 3000 BC, Saṃskṛtam was obviously very different from its ancestor language spoken even 500 years before that. Maybe that ancestor language came from elsewhere, or maybe its mother or daughter did. Maybe a single Central Asian tribe of shepherds in 8000 BC interned in the Kabul valley one season and transferred the entire cultural kit to early Daitya-Āditya tribes! But war chariots were not introduced to India from outside. Horse species of all kinds are located peripheral to the greater Indian subcontinent, including the true horse. Fire altars are attested in India long before the arrival of any “Aryans” in the 2nd millennium BC. So whether it was through the Z93 R1a haplogroup, through a single Afghan tribe interning in the winter, or through a trickle of Central Asian tribes migrating over centuries- what exactly in Vedic and Indian culture did they bring from outside, and why should we think of them as Aryan in any sense?

Indians moved from nomadic to settled states without significant invasions or migrations from abroad, and while all kinds of cultural, genetic and linguistic exchange can be found the language, culture and worldview evidenced among Aryans- people of the Ṛgveda- is undoubtedly homegrown. There was never an invasion. No migrations. Many ‘singular tribes’ who interned but not the transfer of an Aryan kit from abroad. No foreign Aryans who pushed southwards an urban Dravidian populace. No male elite dominance that defined Indian religion and social organisation for millennia to come. No usurping of indigenous property rights by a foreign populace. The Aryans were Indians. They were your ancestors and mine. Tamil is my heritage and Saṃskṛtam yours, and the reverse is equally true. The tiniest goddess-idol on an isolated Andamanese island is our culture as much as the greatest myth of Indra is. This in fact is the true Aryan history.

A final point is driven home by considering the term drāviḍa. Quite like the word ārya it never had any racial connotations. Further, while Ārya was still a kind of ethnic denomination among some tribes, Drāviḍa was purely a geographic one. In their paper The A of ABC of Indian Chronology, Manogna Sastry and Megh Kalyanasundaram compile Ārya and Drāviḍa as they occur in Indian texts. It’s not surprising that in a survey of Indo-Aryan texts the ratio of Ārya to Drāviḍa is more than 10:1. What’s clinching is that in the oldest surviving works of Tamil literature- Ezhuttadikaram, Solladikaram and Poruladikaram- not a single instance of the word Drāviḍa is found! The word itself is a Saṃskṛtam word, not a Tamil one- so much for Aryans vs. Dravidians!