---
title: vishvamitra, first of the name
sno: 49
---

Nine centuries ago, the younger son of Purūrava migrated north and established a kingdom around Kanyākubja, later Kannauj. Expanding north this kingdom would in time occupy a territory that later converges with the kingdom of Pāñcāla in the Vedic era. These people adopt a semi-riparian culture on the upper Gaṅgā that brings them in contact with the cultural horizon of Rakhigarhi. Their expansion towards Ahikṣetra likely puts them in conflicts with Rākṣasa and Yakṣa tribes. By around 3100 BC, this line is ruled by Kuśa, and the Purāṇas are confused about the immediate descent after him. Some name a son called Kuśika, to whom is born Viśvaratha. In other accounts Gādhi or Gāthi appears between Kuśika and Viśvaratha, the latter also being called Kauśika. The Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa agrees with this account, but for reasons explored in Chapter 6 the addition of Gāthi is an error in Paurāṇika genealogy. In reality Kuśa was likely succeeded by Viśvaratha, who was also called Kauśika as his patronymic.

The Mahābhārata hints at a seminal trigger in Viśvaratha’s life. Leading an army to find a band of Rākṣasas that have been raiding his kingdom, he comes upon the āśrama of a Vasiṣṭha, named Devarāja, which his soldiers destroy. When Devarāja returns and sees the destruction, he uses his mystic powers to besiege Viśvaratha’s soldiers. Witnessing first-hand this ṛṣi-power, Viśvaratha resolves to acquire such for himself. Details of this are not vivid, but through varying accounts we can surmise that Viśvaratha travels far and learns from different schools. He gains a kind of enlightenment along the banks of a river far east, which gets his name as Kauśikī (modern Kosi). And from this experience he returns a veritable ṛṣi himself, charged with the power of sound and intonation to match any Vāsiṣṭha. In this new avatāra he’s known to the people as Viśvāmitra, first of his name. The name is curious, for it can be interpreted in one of two ways. As a transformation from Viśvaratha, it could be interpreted as viśva + mitra, symbolising his transformation from a martial prince to a spiritual ṛṣi. But in the alternate interpretation we must notice the long ā, which by rules of language arises only through viśva + amitra, or ‘enemy to all.’ The second interpretation is in line with what tradition suggests, for Viśvāmitra does pick a lasting rivalry not only with the Vāsiṣṭhas but also with the Aikṣvāku dynasty.

Around this time in Ayodhyā, the Aikṣvāku king Tṛyāruṇa loses patience for his son Satyavrata’s deviant ways. Among his crimes is forcefully abducting the wife of another man, and the enraged father exiles his son to the forest. There’s possibly courtly intrigue involved here, for the exile is encouraged by his royal priest, Devarāja Vasiṣṭha. But distraught at exiling his son and heir, Tṛyāruṇa abdicates and retires to the forest. The Aikṣvākus are now ruled by Devarāja as the regent, and Satyavrata the rightful heir languishes in exile. This Satyavrata encounters Viśvāmitra’s neglected family in the forest, and in his zeal to please the ṛṣi he feeds the family- except the food is the meat of a cow. He has by now committed three grievous crimes- wife-abduction, angering of one’s father and cow slaughter. For this he acquires the name Tṛśaṅku. His crimes notwithstanding, Viśvāmitra appreciates his gesture and agrees to become his royal priest, eventually helping him back to the throne after Tṛyāruṇa’s death.

The amity does not last, for Tṛśaṅku’s son, Hariścandra, restores Devarāja Vasiṣṭha to the position of chief purohita, gravely angering Viśvāmitra. It’s curious that one fable about Hariścandra is that he’d taken a vow to always speak the truth- literally a ‘satya-vrat’; or the name of his father. It’s possible that genealogy has confused the two, and both father and son are the same person. If this is so Viśvāmitra’s grudge would have been deeper, for in installing Vasiṣṭha back to the purohita position Satyavrata would have insulted the favour Viśvāmitra did to him. We are told that Hariścandra marries a woman named Candramatī from the Sivi tribe, and we should note this instance of interaction between Aikṣvākus and those who inhabit the regions of Kekaya and Madra- for it lasts through several consequent generations and has Ṛgvedic implications too. Like several Aikṣvāku rulers before him, Hariścandra is unable to bear an heir and approaches Vasiṣṭha for aid.

The mythology is that through the grace of Varuṇa a son named Rohitāśva is born, but under the condition that the boy will later be returned to Varuṇa. Parsing this myth historically is difficult, but we may note that Rohitāśva is responsible for establishing a fortress along the Gaṅgā, downstream of Kāśī, in his own name. There could have been a break in genealogy, a contest for succession, attacks from enemy tribes, or some other event that leads to the myth of Rohitāśva briefly hiding in the forest to escape Varuṇa who wishes to reclaim him. To placate Varuṇa, Hariścandra offers the son of a brāhmin who surrenders him for wealth. This son is named Śunahśepa, and Viśvāmitra appears at his sacrifice to rescue him from reclamation by Varuṇa. He is adopted by the ṛṣi, renamed Devarāta, and inherits the kingdom of Kanyākubja.

This too lends itself to curiosity, for Viśvāmitra’s rival is named Devarāja- sovereign of the gods. In naming his heir Devarāta- beloved of the gods or alternately, for the gods’ amusement, is Viśvāmitra mocking Devarāja? We can never know of course, but we can speculate. He appears again in Hariścandra’s life to deliver a series of tests of the latter’s reputation for honesty and charity. From a historical lens, one interpretation could be that Viśvāmitra was a constant thorn in Aikṣvāku ritual and succession. He appears as a rebellion against an incumbent tradition- that of the Vāsiṣṭhas, and in establishing his name for the rest of history he is no less a cakravartin.

Later Vaiśvāmitras appear in tradition at several instances, most notably during the era of Rāma Dāśarathi. Vaiśvāmitras also appear as prominent Ṛgvedic composers, and we’ll explore this in Chapter 6. The common presumption is that the Ṛgveda indicates a conflict between one Viśvāmitra and one Vasiṣṭha, and the later Purāṇas used this to fabricate an eternal rivalry between the two ṛṣis. But evidence points to an opposite scenario. The Ṛgvedic conflict, as we’ll see, is no conflict at all. It is in fact imagined in the Ṛgveda due to the Paurāṇika conflict, which was the real one. It began with Viśvāmitra, the first of his name, and his contest with Devarāja Vāsiṣṭha for purohita-ship of the Aikṣvākus. In the consequent generations they are in constant competition for royal patronage, and one generation will much later contest for the patronage of Sudāsa Bhārata.

Viśvāmitra Kauśika is historically relevant in 3100 BC because his sister, Satyavatī, is married to a Bhārgava named Rcikā Aurva. To them is born Jamadagni Bhārgava, and both and his son Rāma Jamadāgneya play a prominent role in the life of Arjuna Kārtavīrya. There is geographical consistency in the entire affair. The Aurva line of Bhārgavas descend from Cyavana, which was originally placed near modern Gujarat. Since the centuries preceding 3100 BC, both the Yādavas and the Haihayas have been expanding from the Yamunā and Narmadā rivers and have come into contact with this Bhārgava clan. A deep and lasting Paurāṇika thread is seeded in this interaction.