---
title: vyasa and the beginning
sno: 72
---

A late Ṛgvedic composer is Parāśara Śāktya, who appears in maṇḍala 1 with hymns dedicated to Agni. In maṇḍala 9 we find the name Śakti Vāsiṣṭha, leading us to wonder whether he is Parāśara’s father or ancestor. The Purāṇas list Parāśara as Śakti’s son, and Śakti as Vasiṣṭha’s. While there may be distance between Parāśara and the original Śakti, there is no ambiguity on the name of Parāśara’s son, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana. He is born of Parāśara’s union with Satyāvatī, prior to her marriage to Śāntanu of the Kuru-Bhāratas. Śāntanu’s elder son through Satyāvatī dies early, and the younger son is unable to reproduce. This threatens to end the Kuru bloodline, and Satyāvatī asks her first son, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana, to help in the matter. Kṛṣṇa begets sons in Vicitravīrya’s wives Ambikā and Ambālikā. To them are born Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu, respectively. Thus the Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas are not Kuru-Bhāratas at all. Maternally they are of the Kāśī bloodline, and paternally they descend from the Vāsiṣṭha-fishermen of Parāśara’s clan. The fundamental conflict in the Mahābhārata is between Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana’s own descendants.

In the modern Hollywood saga Star Wars, the protagonist is named Luke Skywalker. Focus on the phonetics of the first half of that name- ‘Luke-S’- and then notice the name of Star Wars’ creator- George Lucas. We may even notice the similarity between ‘Walker’ and Lucas’ middle name, Walton. Creators have many ways of inserting themselves into their works, so we will never know whether Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana’s role in the Mahābhārata was literal or narrational. As a young boy, Kṛṣṇa takes leave of his mother and departs for the forests, determined to learn the Veda. His journey takes him to the Himālaya, where from the sage Jātūkarṇa he inherits the Veda and other knowledge traditions. This is a curious occurrence, since Dvaipāyana is the son of a Ṛgvedic composer- but he receives the Veda not from his father but a different guru. This makes more sense when we understand that- 1) the days of Ṛgvedic composition were at a close, and 2) composition, assembly and transmission were not necessarily contained in the same persons. Travelling across Bhāratavarṣa, Kṛṣṇa notices the fall of Vedic ritualism, and the growing distance between it and the common life of people. From his vantage point, it may well be the end of a civilisation, marked especially with the ending of the Sarasvatī.

He eventually establishes an āśrama of his own, where he resolves to demystify the Veda, to make it more accessible and inclusive. To this end he divides it into four parts, the fourth being his own compilation of hymns collected during his travels. Thus are born the Ṛg, Sāma, Yajur and Atharva, and Kṛṣṇa becomes the 28th Vyāsa of tradition. He is henceforth known as Veda Vyāsa. He also compiles the Purāṇa and Itihāsa, collated from the vast lore of Bhāratavarṣa, built atop a millennia long sūta-māgadha tradition. These are monumental tasks, their import realised only when we see that the Vedas and Purāṇas carry information, wisdom and legacy from all corners of India. This was all not simply available at one source- it was collated by Veda Vyāsa through rigorous research, study and collection over long decades. And he does all this to put together a formal structure of dharma, the eternal code for order, or ṛta, in Bhāratavarṣa. He does this because, as he laments, “*From dharma spring artha and kāma, why is dharma not practiced then*?”

Each of Vyāsa’s disciples are great sages in their own right. Svāmi Candrasekharendra Sarasvatī uses the analogy of how the leaves of a tree far outnumber the trunk and branches. Similarly, the Vedic tree that Vyāsa sets up flowers into thousands of leaves, each branching manifold through his disciples’ own lineages. The trunk is described here as the jñānakāṇḍa, or the part dealing with knowledge and enlightenment. The leaves are taken as karmakāṇḍa, the part dealing with rites, duties and action. Veda Vyāsa’s work is to set the philosophical, organisational and fundamental base, the synthesis of all knowledge his millennia-long civilisation possesses. He also establishes the Indian lens of history, the view that the past is important only as far as it lends lessons for the present and future. This is what creates the great intermingling of traditions that frustrated Pargiter, of kṣatriya stories being appropriated for brāhmaṇa purposes. Where factual chronology was given lesser importance than was moral derivation. So the stage is set for the coming Kaurava-Pāṇḍava conflict to be woven into the grandest itihāsa narrative yet.

Which is precisely what Veda Vyāsa does, for late in his life he composes another itihāsa, and a continuation of the Paurāṇika tradition he established decades ago. He calls it Jaya, or Bhārata, and at its core frames it as a tale of Pāṇḍava victory and ascension to the Bhārata throne. The tale itself is too elaborate and complex to recapitulate here, and it’s not unfair to say that, in degrees, it’s well known to all Indians. Bhīṣma’s vow, Śāntanu’s disregard, Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s bias, Gāndhāri’s resolve, Arjuna’s valour, Kṛṣṇa’s machinations, Śakuni’s greed, Duryodhana’s ambition, Śikhaṇḍī’s vengeance, Draupadī’s shame, Droṇa’s arrogance, Karṇa’s dilemma, Ekalavya’s dedication, Aśvatthāmā’s amorality, Yudhiṣṭhira’s morality and more- these are themes that have loomed large over Indian lives for thousands of years.

At the end of all alliances, negotiations and peacemaking attempts, the two grand armies face off on the battlegrounds of Kurukṣetra, and at this penultimate moment is found the Hindu nucleus- the Bhagavad Gītā. As much as devotion allows us to see it as Kṛṣna’s dialogue, the historian must not forget that it’s but the crux of Veda Vyāsa’s thought, and by extension of the Vasiṣṭha clan he descends from. After 18 days of terrible war the Pāṇḍavas emerge victorious. Before the end, the dharmayuddha turns into adharmayuddha, and both sides forsake morality to secure victory for themselves. With uncles, cousins, sons, nephews and relatives of all degrees among the dead on both sides, the victory is a hollow one. The Pāṇḍavas hand rule to Parīkṣit, Arjuna’s grandson, and retire for the Himālaya.

The above reductive synopsis appears to us, in the Mahābhārata, as the longest known epic in the world. With more than 1.8 million words, it’s four times larger than the Rāmāyaṇa and nearly ten times the length of Iliad and Odyssey combined. Beyond being an account of a historic battle, it’s Vyāsa’s final attempt at establishing a dhārmika code for Bhāratavarṣa. The epic gives itself to exploration of dharma, to what is just and what ought to be. Each character’s life is a reflection of this study, beginning with Śāntanu- who sacrifices his son’s birthright to pursue his own lusts late in his life. Historically, it presents to us a broad milieu of at least half a millennia. It covers the drying of the Sarasvatī and the great consequent displacement of populations. The rising conflicts among Yādava clans, the growth of the many Kuru branches, the technological rise of southern and eastern Indian tribes, the emergent religious and cultural order, and of course the entire flora, fauna and geography of Bhāratavarṣa. In adding components of the Vedas, Purāṇas and the Rāmāyaṇa, it pays homage to its civilisational legacy and historical continuity.

And like the Rāmāyaṇa, it’s a frank depiction of the society of its times, open to all manner of interpretation and retelling. Though tribes from all of Bhāratavarṣa participate, we have a clear preponderance of in-groups and out-groups, like we do in the Rāmāyaṇa. Bhīma’s wife Hiḍiṁbī is called a Rākṣasī, and when the Pāṇḍava brothers bring their wives to Indraprastha she is not among them. Her son through Bhīma, Ghaṭotkaca, is hailed valorous and strong, but is ultimately no more than an expendable infantryman. The Mahābhārata does both- shows Hiḍiṁbī pursuing Bhīma, initially against his desire and later, has the Rākṣasa Alāyudha wishing to kill Bhīma for raping Hiḍiṁbī. This Alāyudha is killed by her own son, Ghaṭotkaca, so as with all dhārmika narratives we are left to decide the lesson(s) for ourselves. It’s also clear that this is very much a patriarchal society evolved from Ṛgvedic social structures. While females in the Mahābhārata possess agency and independence, the larger construct is of patriarchs, warrior-heroes and ṛṣi-leaders. These are the decision makers of society, and men like Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa are uninhibitedly polygamous. It compels us to be honest about ancient India’s patriarchal structures, and not project an exaggerated sense of gender egalitarianism.

Vyāsa composes the Mahābhārata late in his life, so it follows even the Purāṇa(s) in chronology. We can speculate to the psychology of Vyāsa following the Great War. He’s already a man aware of the need to document, organise and establish dharma, but it isn’t enough to prevent a war between his own (supposed) descendants. Ancient India’s final itihāsa thus is the ageing Vyāsa’s last contribution to its civilisation, and his immediate disciples added layers to create the Mahābhārata within a few centuries. Early Indian archaeology, working under an Aryan Invasion paradigm, associated the Mahābhārata era with PGW Culture of 900 BC and beyond. But we now have archaeological evidence of PGW pottery dating to as early as 2200 BC, and a strong case exists to associate it instead with mature, copper-hoarding OCP, which itself was in contact with later Harappan cultures. As conceded earlier, we must still await genuine evidence for true, horse-driven war chariots in India in the 2nd millennium BC.

PGW, with its early beginnings found 2200 BC onwards, appears indigenous to the ‘Braj’ region, or more broadly the Paurāṇik Śūrasena, Pāñcāla, Matsya and Kuru. Archaeological associations of Mahābhārata and the Kurus are thus not entirely wrong, but we must now factor in the earlier datings and the evidence of the Andhaka-Vṛṣṇi-Śūrasena expansions. The BRW substrate found running east-to-west from the Gangetic Plains is attested as the westward expansions driven from Magadha under the Bārhadratha Kurus. The archaeological evidence of Rājgṛha is crucial in this regard, around which a number of PGW and OCP sites have been found. The city was variously known as Girivraja, Kuśāgrapura and Bārhadrathpura. According to Buddhaghoṣa, a later Buddhist commentator, the city was once ruled by Māndhātṛ, and in the Purāṇas the region is first occupied by Nāga hill tribes. All of this confirms the region of Magadha to be ancient and well known to Indian traditions.

Vyāsa and the Mahābhārata are not accepted elements of mainstream Indian history. In any analysis of Vedic structures, composition and chronologies, Vyāsa is conspicuous only by absence. And the Mahābhārata is considered a mythological epic that draws from prior battles, such as the Battle of Ten Kings in the Ṛgveda. But as we’ve seen, that was never a singular battle, and to assume parallels between it and the Mahābharata are no more sophisticated than simply equating battle with battle. Contrary to the mainstream image, a possible battle along the Paruṣṇī river was only one part of Sudās’ reign, and the dāśarājña hymns also place him along the Yamunā. The Mahābhārata on the other hand is one, 18-day long battle, on the singular plains of Kurukṣetra. Relegating this to a mythological composite is arguably the greatest injustice done to ancient Indian history. We might argue that this has been Vyāsa’s fate as well, but for the fact that he took care not to claim authorship for anything. He compiles and arranges the Vedas, but instead of inserting his own name in them it gives him the name of Veda Vyāsa. He compiles the Purāṇas, but he is not the author for any of them. And when he puts together the Mahābhārata, an event in his own lifetime, he calls it itihāsa- this is how it happened. Within a few generations, the story becomes more prominent than the author.

A final issue is of script and writing, or its spread across India. The Indus script is not yet conclusively deciphered, so we’ve avoided discussion on it in this book. But in the early 2nd millennium BC we see it appearing in the upper Yamunā doab as well, or in the maturing OCP Culture. In general, it appears that in the SSC, as elsewhere, writing or scripts first emerged as commercial markers, or brand logos as it were. Accountants, traders and merchants of all kinds needed not only to maintain ledgers, but also to mark goods with the proper signs of seller and buyer- made all the more pressing by long-distance trade with Sumer and beyond. This may be a reason why a culture given to the science of sound and hymnology, such as the Vedic, did not find immediate need to pick up writing. To this day the Vedas are not traditionally considered books at all, and they are meant to be heard, not read. But tradition also maintains that the art of writing was lost in the centuries preceding the Mahābhārata, an indication perhaps of the general breakdown associated with the decay of Mature Harappan. Vyāsa is credited with re-instituting it when he scribes the Mahābhārata, though this may well be a later projection. We know that the Purāṇa(s), immediately following Vyāsa, were still transmitted orally for generations. So writing is not assimilated by the Vedic people for a long time.

In Paurāṇika accounts, the first Purāṇa and the entire Mahābhārata are narrated to Janamejaya, son of Parīkṣit and grandson of Arjuna. He is one of the last Kuru rulers, and genealogical focus shifts to the Bārhadrathas of Magadha. The narrative style of the late Bhaviṣya Purāṇa, as the name suggests, gives accounts of following dynasties as if it’s a prediction of the future. This period is the dawning of attested Indian history, of the precursors to true empire that will eventually lead to Candragupta Maurya. Tradition holds that the major Kali Yuga begins with Kṛṣṇa’s death, and a late calculation by Āryabhaṭa has led to 3102 BC as the posited date. But we’ve discussed how this is incorrect from a historical point of view, and must be taken only as a date of astronomical significance. Minor Kali Yuga begins instead in 1900 BC or 1500 BC, depending on the date of the Mahābhārata. This is the end of ancient Indian history, and the beginning of its own ‘present age.’ It’s precisely analogous to the BC-AD paradigm of modern civilisation, and for early India we may well think in terms of BM-AM- Before Mahābhārata-After Mahābhārata. The AM of Indian history overlaps with the BC of world timelines, for only after the Mahābhārata is our past considered verifiable and tangible. We began our journey at the Holocene-onset, and have covered the entire trajectory from there to the Mahābhārata. It’s now time to contextualise the whole affair.