---
title: yayati nahusya
sno: 45
---

Civilisation has existed for at least five thousand years by Yayāti’s time. Many manvantaras have elapsed, and the glory days of Daitya and Āditya kingdoms are long past. Even the early kings are ancient memory, and the ṛṣis now remember history to begin a few centuries ago. Names and people from the eras before that will soon be mythologised, as civilisations always do for the ages past. This period precedes what is known archaeologically as the pre-Harappan phase, but sites like Bhirrana, Kunal and Rakhigarhi on the Sarasvatī basin are well established urbanising centers. They’ve appeared on the Ailā geographical horizon since the reign of Yayāti’s father, and his time marks an expansion of the sphere from modern Prayagraj to the greater Delhi/Haryana/western UP area.

A final Āditya-Daitya war happens around this time, where the Bhṛgu ṛṣi Uśanas-Śukra aids the Daityas while the Aṇgīrasa Bṛhaspati aids Ādityas. Uśanas has a daughter named Devayānī, and she is Yayāti’s first wife. To her are born the sons Yadu and Turvaśa. To Śarmiṣṭhā the second wife, daughter of a Daitya king, are born Druhyu, Anu and Pūru. These five sons together are considered the great progenitors of Indo-Aryan peoples, and they are arguably patriarchs to all Indo-Europeans (linguistically). The Ṛgveda’s pañcajana, or five tribes, are equated to people descended from these five sons. This is unlikely to be a literal truth. We can accept some link between Yayāti and Pūru, the son his kingdom descended to. But the other sons could equally represent the people Yayāti’s tribe came into contact with when they expanded to the greater Sarasvatī region, though they were equally Indian and likely spoke similar dialects. In view of Tonoyan-Belyayev’s idea of archaic peripheries and centers of innovation, we can think of Pṛthu’s era as the first era of linguistic innovation, the pre-PIE era. With the Ṛgvedic pañcajana begins another period of innovation which will disperse languages over the previously established routes.

But even as myth the story gives us interesting historical clues. Through their mother the Yadu and Turvaśa people carry Bhārgava blood, while the Druhyu, Anu and Pūru people are maternally Daitya. Bhārgavas and Daityas in turn have cultural and marital relations into deep antiquity. Already academic visions of Aryans vs. Dravidians, invaders vs. indigenous etc. are put to rest. Even if we find a binary among people then, an Ārya vs. non-Ārya for example, there were inter-marriages and varied relationships from the very beginning. Any ethnic colours we see are actually our own, and through the mists of earliest history we see an incestuous diversity among India’s many tribes and peoples- precisely what the genetic landscape reveals. It’s possible that the period reflects a kind of ethnic reset. The previous divisions between Āditya, Daitya, Bhārgava, Dānava and other clans have lost favour and new lineages arise as nomadic conglomerates coalesce around and cohabit nascent villages. We are informed that a cultural continuity exists nonetheless in the inter-marriages of Mānavas and their Mesolithic antecedents.

The Ṛgveda mentions Yayāti twice. In RV 1-31-17 he’s hailed as an ancient sacrificer to Agni. RV 10-63-1 confirms that the Yayāti in question is Nahuṣa’s son. Further, he’s attributed as the composer of verses 4-6 in RV 9-101. Book 9 of the Ṛgveda is dedicated completely to soma, and more literally to the pressing of it- Soma Pavamāna. That Yayāti features as a composer here indicates he was as familiar with soma as he was with Agni (without getting into what soma actually was). This makes sense given his father-in-law was descended from the Bhṛgus. Yayāti is placed in the cakravartin list likely because he represents an early wave of political and cultural organisation, emphasised by him expanding to the Sarasvatī. That the later pañcajana of India are said to descend to him indicates his empire spanned a vast swathe of territory in north India. The political scenario of his time can be summarised such:

- To his north-east were the Aikṣvākus, centered at Ayodhyā with Pṛthu (not Vainya) or Aṇena as the ruling monarch.
- To his east, further on the Gaṅgā, was Kāśī- ruled by his cousins/uncle.
- Further east was the Vaiśālī kingdom in modern Bihar (the chronological placement here is admittedly suspect), and Bhalāndana is the most likely candidate for its ruler then.
- North of Vaiśālī, in modern Nepal, was Videha- the kingdom established by Ikṣvāku’s younger son. This was the Janaka dynasty, and Mithi Janaka would have been a near-contemporary of Yayāti. Mithi is also the traditional founder of Mithilā.
- All around these centers of urbanisation were various tribes such as Gandharvas, Piśācas, Devas, Asuras, Daityas, Dānavas and Rākṣasas. During or just before Yayāti’s reign there was a great war among these people. The distinction is between an urbanising, agrarian populace ushering the Neolithic and a variety of nomadic, riparian, arboreal and mountain tribes sustaining the Mesolithic.
- There’s evidence to suggest the presence of Niṣadha tribes in India from very early on. Varyingly these tribes have been associated with rivers, boats and fishes. It’s likely that these riparian people existed in Yayāti’s time.
- Apart from these were other people whose placement and veracity we have less to go on. There were likely tribes in modern Orissa and Bihar descended, in some fashion, from Manu- Gaya and Utkala dynasties. Way west, near Gujarat, might have been the Nāga people of Ānarta- another dynasty descended from Manu. As we move further in the genealogies we see less and less of these people.
- Archaeologically, sites like Bhirrana and Rakhigarhi already exist, as does Jhusi near modern Prayagraj. So Yayāti’s expansions bring him to evolving urban centers that have existed for millennia.

The actual stories of course do not present a historical account. In Yayāti’s case, the Mahābhārata tells us that he performed a 100 rājasūyas (coronations), 100 aśvamedhas (horse sacrifices that underpinned acts of conquest), 100 vājapeyas (sacrifices involving soma), 100 atīratras (fire rituals), 100 puṇḍarīkas (rituals involving flowers) and several agniṣṭhomas (fire rituals) and caturmāsyas (penances/rituals during the caturmāsa period July-October). These numbers are obviously not literal and are meant to imply magnitude, not actual quantum. Clearly whatever else Yayāti may have done, he appeased the rituals and gods in all the right ways. He performed various sacrifices, prayers and penances which surely gave him greater legitimacy and support. Rituals like the rājasūya and aśvamedha are obviously military in nature, so there is evidence that Yayāti expanded his territories.

The actual details of Yayāti’s life are mixed with myth and confabulations, or in any case tell us next to nothing of his life as a monarch. We’re told that he encounters in the forest, fallen into a well, Devayānī the daughter of Uśanas-Śukra. This Devayānī he marries, but later has relations with one of her maids, Śarmiṣṭhā. This infidelity greatly angers Uśanas-Śukra, who curses Yayāti with premature old age. Later, at Śarmiṣṭhā’s pleading, Śukra adds a rider- one of Yayāti’s sons’ can take his place as the old man, and Yayāti’s youth can be returned to him. Yayāti asks each of his sons to take his curse, and all but the youngest refuse. Thus to Pūru the youngest Yayāti bequeaths his main kingdom, and the other sons he sends away in different directions. After receiving youth from his son, he lived for a thousand years and experienced pleasures and passions of all kinds. From this he realised the futility of chasing sense pleasures, and the need to renounce craving and desire. He returns to Pūru his youth and retires himself into the forest, eventually finding way to Svarga- the realm of Indra.

Picking out history from such stories is never going to be an exact science, but we can try. Yayāti lived a long life and reigned for many years. In other words, given the conqueror he was and the span of territory his descendants later occupied, he likely campaigned for decades late into his life. This could be one reason for the myth around his old age and the theft of youth from his own son. Exaggerated accounts of the amount of sacrifices he did, including military ones, attest to the imperial nature of his actions. When we map this knowledge with what we later learn about the pañcajana’s original kingdoms, or of the account of how he split the kingdom among his sons, we get a fair sense for the spread of Yayāti’s empire. If Yadu, Turvaśa, Anu, Druhyu and Pūru were indeed his sons, we can be sure that the issue of succession wasn’t as neat as we’re told. It’s possible that Yayāti’s kingdom was forcibly broken by them, and later stories added an account of youth and old age to insert lessons into the tale.

Exploration and expansion in 4000 BC is unlikely to have boldly struck across the landscape. North of Pratiṣṭhāna, the entire Gangetic Plains were covered with the dense forest of Naimiṣāraṇya, populated with all sorts of unknown tribes (though equally Indian, it bears repeating). Some of the Yamunā would have been known, but no sooner did one move north along it would another vast forest emerge, later known as Kuru Jāñgala. Yayāti’s expansion likely led him north along the Gaṅgā first, where close to the Himalayan foothills would upper Yamunā and Sarasvatī have become familiar. Moving downstream along these he’d encounter clusters such as Bhirrana and Rakhigarhi at pre-Harappan stages of development. The region had gone through a few millennia of advanced Neolithic regionalisation, and we know that at least from Prahlāda’s time humans were roaming around and settling along the Sarasvatī. Yayāti’s actions kicked off a wave of agrarian and commercial integration. There’s cultural continuity before Yayāti, but a large part of his expansion was through uncontested land- partly explaining the hundred aśvamedhas.

It’s also safer to call him an expansionist than a conqueror. Carrying Daitya, Asura and Gandharva lineage himself, he’s unlikely to have actually waged war over such tribes. And given that there’s already record of a Deva-Asura war in his time or immediately preceding it, his own war against Asura conglomerates would not have gone unrecorded. Thus, it’s more likely that he colonised the Sarasvatī than conquered it from anyone. Equally likely- his period represents a definitive shift from tentative post-nomadic to confident urban lifestyles. As cakravartin then, he was the first to get the wheel moving. His expansion would have eventually encountered the civilisation radiating out from Mehrgarh (or it was a remembered culture from the past, and thus not foreign). In the millennia following they coalesced into the mature SSC.

Through the account of how Yayāti divided his kingdom among the five sons we get a picture of civilisation at the time. Having expanded westward and north from Pratiṣṭhāna, Yayāti’s kingdom is centered along modern Haryana/Delhi/western UP. Here a city such as Rakhigarhi, located on the Sarasvatī-Dṛṣadvatī river network, could have served as a convenient capital to consolidate pre-Harappan cultures from. Yayāti’s consequent expansions would have radiated out from here, such that we know his kingdom was divided thus:

- The north beyond the Śatadru went to Anu
- West of Sarasvatī, from where the Śatadru meets the Sindhu and beyond, went to Druhyu.
- South and south-west, downstream the Yamunā and Carmaṇavatī, went to Yadu.
- South and south-east, with tradition forgetting about his descendants for a long time, went to Turvaśa.
- The central kingdom, including the northern Sarasvatī and all of the Yamunā went to Pūru. His descendants, through the Pūru and Kuru Bhāratas, are the protagonists of Vedic and Paurāṇika literature.

A lot of Yayāti’s expansion would have been through virgin land, his many coronations and horse sacrifices likely to be more acts of announcing one’s claim than wresting it from someone. This is the Chalcolithic age, without the superior weapons and armour that bronze provides, and most of the known contemporary tribes are to Yayāti’s north and east. Small bands of tribal warriors would have followed sacrificial horses through isolated settlements, declaring to the perhaps confused villagers that they were now part of someone’s empire. And archaeology tells us this brought standardisation, increase in trade and improvement in technology.

We should treat the pañcajana’s descent from him not as literal truth but more a historical description of conditions. We see in later history the Yādavas continually attempting to penetrate into the Gangetic Plains with the Narmadā basin as their base. The Turvaśas are said to manifest later as Pāṇḍyas, Colas, Ceras- south Indian dynasties. We can in fact speculate that Yādavas and Turvaśas were southern Indian tribes that came into contact with the expanding Pūru cultural sphere. Linguistically they might even have had Dravidian roots, allowing for the PIE homeland to neighbour the Dravidian. In the Vedic accounts we’ll later visit, of all tribes that are said to migrate out of India due to the actions of Pūru-Bhāratas, Yādavas and Turvaśas are not named. This is why Dravidian had no influence on the IE languages that dispersed out of India. The Ānavas and Druhyus were the coalescing cultures in modern Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan and Afghanistan. These were the people of Kot Diji, Rehman Dheri and perhaps Mehrgarh. That they are given as Yayāti’s descendants indicates that the ethnic/cultural identities of Yadu, Turvaśa, Anu, Druhyu and Pūru emerged some time after him.

Over the next few centuries these people will establish various kingdoms and dynasties, and these can be mapped to pre-Harappan cultures found along the Sindhu and Sarasvatī river valleys. Yayāti's reign has provided an organisational base for mature civilisation to emerge, and as early Chalcolithic cultures begin to experiment with alloys we see the rise of the next cakravartin. And yet all of this is speculative, emerging when we take the Paurāṇika account and try to map it along an archaeological and temporal band. It is descriptive history, and even as we respect the Purāṇas for retaining enough to make this possible we must ask- what does it tell us about the civilisational felt-experience? It’s a question we presently delay answering, but soon will have to confront.