---
title: yugas and manvantaras
sno: 15
---

The ancient Indian division of time is undoubtedly one of the most comprehensive and detailed divisions of time ever. It begins with a truthi, which is calculated as 1/168th of a second (approximately). We currently have no explanation for why these ancient people needed such minuscule divisions of time, or what they did with these units. 10 truthis make up a vedha, nine vedhas make a nimeṣa (half a second) and so on till we get a muhūrta (1 hour), a divas (1 day) and a vatsara (1 year).

360 vatsaras, or human years, make up a single year of the devas, or Daivika year. 12,000 Daivika years form an epoch known as the mahāyuga, which in turn is composed of four smaller periods- Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali. The calculations till this stage yield a figure of 4.32 million years for a single mahāyuga, and a thousand mahāyugas make for half a day of Brahmā, or Reality. This brings us to 8.64 billion years for a complete day and night of Brahmā, a figure short of modern physics’ age for this universe by some 6-7 billion years. But the ancient Indians didn’t stop there. Brahmā has a lifespan of a hundred years, which means the entire duration of Reality is 155 trillion years! And Reality itself is subject to waxing and waning in an infinite cycle of creation and destruction.

While these figures are of cosmological and cultural curiosity, they offer nothing to the historian. Even the division into four yugas, if mapped as is onto the historical record, forces one to make absurd claims. The four yugas are divided into a descending duration of 4,800 years, 3,600 years, 2,400 years and 1,200 years for Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali respectively. But these are Daivika years, where each year is made of 360 human years. Dvāpara Yuga is said to begin with Rāma’s reign, which would mean he lived 1.2 million years ago- long before the evolution of homo sapiens! To accept Paurāṇika chronologies as is, we would have to dismiss the complete body of evolutionary and anthropological science, and thus remove ourselves from modern discourse- contrary to the intent of this book.

One resolution is to remove the layer that inserts Daivika-years and to take the figures as representing human years. This gives us 12,000 years as the total span of a mahāyuga. An account by Āryabhaṭa gives 3102 BC as the date of Kali Yuga’s onset. Working backwards, we get the following dates for Satya, Tretā and Dvāpara respectively- 11502 BC, 6702 BC and 4302 BC. But even these dates should not be taken literally. Here Rāma would be placed at around 4302 BC, an unlikely date for a variety of reasons. Simply put, to think that all of ancient Indian literature- across time, space and personalities- works on a singular framework is incorrect. As a means of cosmic time-keeping, there were many yuga layers- esoteric, astronomical, historic. Within the philosophical tradition, it is understood that different phenomena in reality are set to different time-scales. The division of a time-scale into four yugas is a general application, but the real dates and bands can only be talked of in specific applications. The four yugas of reality itself- or the life of Brahmā- are not the same as four yugas of a discernible period of human history. It would have been entirely convenient for us, if the Purāṇas had limited yugas for cosmic scales and not talked of historic events in the same language- but such is not the case.

In reality, the tradition tells us of both- a time-scale of 4.32 million years, and in which yuga was the Ṛgveda composed- for example. This makes the historical task much tougher, for no serious work can realistically consider Rāma to have lived more than a million years ago- which would be the case if we use the yuga framework at face value. Prof. R Parthasarthy has chronicled the various yuga-systems that are found in Indian tradition, including a 5-year yuga cycle. He distinguishes between two primary cycles- a long yuga cycle and a short yuga cycle. The long cycle is the face-value one, where a mahāyuga is of 4.32 million years. The short yuga cycle involves removing the “daivika” layer from the long cycle, and results in a mahāyuga of 12000 years. To Parthasarthy, the Purāṇas only use the long cycle whenever they refer to yugas. But he also points to the work of Yogi Yukteshwar Giri, who insisted that the short cycle was the original one.

In effect, we can continue to quote a variety of scholars who reconcile the yuga confusion in different ways. But for a historical framework of ancient Indian history this problem seems moot. There is no plausible framework in which we could use the long cycle as is, and pretend to map all of Paurāṇika history along it. When considering that the short cycle essentially covers the geological period from Younger Dryas/Holocene onset onwards, it becomes obvious that this is the cycle to adopt in a historical framework. But is it as simple as adopting the short cycle? Let us accept for a moment that Kali Yuga began in 3102 BC. Can we subtract 10800 years from this and conclude that the Satya Yuga began in 13902 BC?

Mapping Paurāṇika tradition to the above would imply that the primary period of Ṛgvedic composition was 13902-9201 BC in the Satya Yuga; that Tretā started in 9201 BC with the killing of Arjuna Kārtavīrya by Rāma Jamadāgneya; and that Dvāpara commenced in 5601 BC with the coronation of Rāma Dāśarathi. For the reasons enumerated above, these dates are not tenable at all. What is the persistent historian to do in this scenario? I find that the best-fit solution lies in reconciling Parthasarthy’s findings on multiple yuga-scales with JN Ravi’s frame of the Mārkaṇḍeya mahāyuga, to which we will add the concept of nested yugas and the historical mahāyuga of Vaivasvat. But before we reach there, what of manvantaras?

As with yugas, to take the cosmic time-scale of manvantaras as a historical reference is approach-flawed at outset. If we map the layer as is, we find ourselves claiming that Svāyambhuva Manu, the first Manu, lived more than 8 billion years ago! Clearly there is an allegorical nature to the notion of manvantaras, even if in-principle we cannot deny that there might be a continuity of culture and transmission in human beings for hundreds of thousands of years. Remember that anatomically modern human beings have been around for more than 350,000 years. Surely the earliest ones too told stories to their children, danced to tribal ballads around the camp-fire, had great rulers and ruthless villains, and lived lives as experientially rich as we might today. Even something as basic as the wheel- where the supposed intuition is only that a round object moves easier- could have occurred to any homo sapien at any point of time, multiple times over.

No doubt there were meticulous star gazers even in 15000 BC, for example, or humans conducting experiments on the science of vocalisation during the Last Glacial Maximum, or even a tribal warlord forging a great coalition in 70000 BC. Take the curious speculation that the ancient Paurāṇika Deva-Asura wars are memory of the inter-species conflicts of prehistory! In this frame, Devas become Neanderthals, Asuras become Denisovans, and Manuṣyas are us- homo sapiens. As fascinating as this sounds, there is nothing beyond speculative latitude that could lead us here. In our framework, we will speculate that the memory of Priyavrata, elder son of Svāyambhuva, could in fact be a memory that precedes Svāyambhuva and the Holocene. This is because stories of Priyavrata and his descendants map well to the known genetic dispersals out of India between LGM and the Holocene.

The correct resolution for a manvantara-framework is to delink it from cosmic time-scales and understand it as a historical continuity. Manvantaras are the ages of man, or the ages of the rise and fall of cultural transmission. Each new manvantara refers to a cultural reset, a break in continuity and a civilisational restart of a kind. Having understood it this way, we may now link manvantaras to yugas within a historical framework, where there are two mahāyuga cycles to think of. The first is the Mārkaṇḍeya mahāyuga, which began with Holocene-onset as Ravi shows. And the 1st manvantara (historical) did not begin with the awakening of Brahmā 8 billion years ago, it began with the Mārkaṇḍeya Satya/Kṛta Yuga. To this we add the notion of nested yuga cycles. Inside each larger yuga is a smaller mahāyuga cycle, such that the Mārkaṇḍeya Satya Yuga, for example, contains four smaller yugas within it. The second yuga cycle of historical interest then is the Vaivasvat mahāyuga, which commenced with the 7th and current manvantara. Paurāṇika data deals with the 1st and 7th manvantaras in similar ways- for example having them both commence with a great flood. Even the notion of avatāras finds a compatible mapping against this framework, as we will see in the concluding chapter.

The Purāṇas give us an elaborate genealogy of the 1st manvantara, which has everyone descend from Brahmā and his mind-born son, Svāyambhuva Manu. The family trees of the following five manvantaras are short, but of the 7th and current manvantara are elaborate. In the current manvantara, all major tribes are shown to descend from Vaivasvat Manu. Pargiter’s reconciliation of Paurāṇika genealogies arrived at 94 generations between Vaivasvat Manu and the characters that fought the Mahābhārata war. This gives us a way to date Vedic and early Paurāṇika history. If we can assign a date to the Mahābhārata war, we can work backwards and arrive at a date for Vaivasvat Manu. This then would be the date of commencement for the 7th manvantara, and also of a nested mahāyuga cycle within the larger that commenced in ~11502 BC.

This nested model will manifest presently in how we chronologise ancient Indian history. But there’s the added element of astronomy to consider. Like genetics, astronomy is a hard science. The data it throws up cannot be dismissed without consideration. But also like genetics, astronomy is a supplementary field in history. It cannot be used in isolation but only be added to an existing base of archaeological, textual and linguistic evidence. Let’s understand what that means.