---
title: Peacock Feathers - Being and Not Being Brahmin
tags: opinion
originallydated: Jul, 2018
---

*As I chronicle in <a href="https://www.brhat.in/dhiti/decolonizationapersonalfootprint" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer">this essay</a> I wrote, I've spent the majority of my life thoroughly colonized. Well into my journey back home- a ghar-vaapsi- now, even I look back at some of my old writings with embarassment.*

*While most works I would outright disown today, in that I no longer hold the beliefs they espouse. This one in particular I intend to "rewrite" one day soon as an intellectual inquiry into what I may write different- and what I may retain as is.*

Born to a family that calls itself Saryuparin Brahmin, from a village Ishaaru in eastern Uttar Pradesh, being brahmin has never been a conscious part of my identity. In a sense, this could be defined as privilege. Privilege is the ability to choose your own identity. And thus I was an atheist, socialist, capitalist, humanist and other things much more than I was a brahmin. I suspect the same is not true for those born to minority groups, where that minority identity is imposed on them by society at every stage of their lives. And so a Dalit is a Dalit first and foremost, while I’m a writer, musician and manager.

The deep caste-based roots of my grandparents on either side notwithstanding, brahminism was never really inculcated in me by my parents. My father never wore the typical brahmin marker, the janeyu thread, and my own ceremony was only done in formality prior to my marriage. That said, it is confessedly fortunate that my wife also hails from a brahmin family, and there may be an entire sociological essay on why it was always more likely that I meet and fall in love with an upper caste Hindu than with anyone else, but if her family was of different origins our marital relations might not have been established so smoothly.

I was told in childhood the origin myth of our kind of brahmins. Saryuparin brahmins claim to date from the time of King Rama. The myth goes that once Rama returned victorious from Lanka, among the citizens’ mutterings was the fact that Rama had killed a brahmin, for that was indeed Ravana’s caste. The murder of a brahmin was a grave sin, and when Rama heard of his citizens’ unrest he desired to conduct a massive havan to negate his sin. Most brahmins of Ayodhya abstained from the havan, not wanting to associate with anything related to brahmin murder, even its penance. But a group of brahmins supported Rama and conducted the havan nevertheless, later moving across the Sarayu river and settling beyond- thus earning the name Saryuparin, across the Sarayu. Thus goes the myth, and you are free to make of it what you will. As a young boy I believed it for a while, not knowing better and finding in it a favourable legend of my family’s origins. But by my late teens, inspired by the likes of Richard Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens, I had turned militantly atheistic.

##### While this did not lessen the healthy respect I’d developed for Indic wisdom as exemplified by the Upanishads, it did distance me from Hinduism as it is lived and practiced today.

This also meant distancing from the rituals and beliefs of my own family, in effect delinking me from my cultural roots. In the following years, as I understood the pervasiveness of the caste system better, I developed what I can best confess as disgust for so much that ‘my people’ believed in and did. This also means that you can no longer relate well with your relatives. The things they say, the values they hold, are so opposite to your own that it is no longer possible to have general, long-form conversations with them. Over time the distance grows, and you end up living in different realities. My corporate office and gated residential lifestyle of Gurgaon are so far removed from the hierarchical, cultural and social life of my ancestral village that the two may as well be different countries.  It’s in this context that earlier this year, at the passing of my paternal grandmother, I returned to my village for the funeral rites. Two weeks of unending ritual is a good way to revisit one’s estranged roots, and it gave me a way to recontextualise my brahmin-ness.

A grandmother’s funeral is no place to raise debates on religion or caste, so my participation was of a dutiful grandson. And within our elaborate labyrinth of ritualism, the eldest and only grandson (ritual does not count grandsons born by daughters) has special responsibility and status, both. For those fourteen days I was deeply immersed in the culture, traditions and hierarchies of my people that I have so proudly shunned all my life. It’s a curious feeling- to be among your kin-group and yet share nothing with them ideologically.

##### You can shift between moments of in-group-ness and out-group-ness, though not entirely with cognitive ease. How does one reconcile the almost biological urge to connect with one’s roots with the brahmin things that one just cannot stomach?

Of the latter there are many. Always apparent is the sentiment of brahmin supremacy, articulated by uncles, grandfathers, aunts and others alike. Hierarchies are painfully evident- the men eat first, or the priests do, caste-dynamics are strong. Even within brahmins some consider themselves superior to others. The funeral’s officiating priests proudly declared to me- “We officiate only for the highest brahmins, we don’t go to the homes of the lesser brahmins.” That may well have been a misfired comment to appease my brahmin pride, but it says something either way. The rules say that the grieving family must gift the officiating priests artefacts related to the deceased’s life.  My grandmother used utensils, so we gifted utensils. She wore slippers and slept on a bed with a mosquito net, so we gifted those. She used standard cosmetics, a walking stick, a flashlight and other assortments, so these were gifted. Of course, anyone noticing closely would ask- who makes these rules? After these gifts were served the priest presented us with an interesting claim. Since my grandmother had also fed cows in her lifetime, we ought to gift a young calf as well.

Of course, prior to being presented these gifts were neatly laid out for all to see. There is prestige in being a brahmin who gifts generously, and the more you gift the higher your status is in the hierarchy. The Tiwaris gave a cycle to the officiating priest? Well maybe the Pandeys should give a motorcycle then! On a different day, my grandfather had to place cardamom, yogurt, besan laddoos and other thingies, one by one, in a designated area, twelve times. What did that mean, I asked the priest. He explained that each designated area stood for a month of the year. In donating these edibles to each month, my grandfather was ensuring that my grandmother’s soul passed through all the months and was liberated to make its journey to the great beyond. Intrigued, I asked the priest about the coming future where humanity would colonise other planets. On one planet the year may have fifteen months, or eight months on another, I pointed out. How would these ritual calculations work out then? The priest’s response was illuminating. “If and when that happens,” he explained, “One of us will go there and figure it out.” By us he didn’t mean any brahmin, he meant the exclusive group of officiating priests. This is how they would preserve their power and status, of course.

##### There is no doubt in my mind that once, in the ancient past, many of these rituals had a deeper meaning and symbolism to them.

Take the cremation process, where at one point the skull is broken in with a stick and the family sits by for a few hours watching the corpse burn and turn to ash. The entire act is designed to be a process of closure and acceptance for the grieving family. In breaking the skull we internalise that this is not a person anymore, merely a vessel. And in watching that vessel turn to ash we are helped in accepting the finality of all life. Some hours before the cremation, there is a ritual where the husband applies vermillion on his dead wife for the last time. After a lifetime together (my grandparents were married at the age of sixteen) my grandfather could have a personal occasion to say goodbye to his partner. This beautiful moment was ruined by the cacophony of my aunts arguing with the priest over whether the vermillion was to be applied across the entire parting of hair or just on the forehead. My grandfather, no doubt going through an internal process of grief himself, could not get this moment in peace. He was shouted at to hurry up, one aunt trying to get him to run the vermillion across the entire parting and another aunt shouting to stop just a little beyond the forehead.

But as certain as I am of ancient symbolism, I am also of modern absurdity. All that deep meaning is buried beneath an obscure, ossified and often senseless orthopraxy that is more representative of modern brahmins than is the wisdom our ancestors once produced.

##### Cultural artefacts are good only if we learn from them and grow towards an inclusive humanism. An inward-looking culture that does not change or grow eventually exists only for self-preservation. And this is where I’m reminded of peacock feathers.

The peacock’s famously elaborate plumage is a fine example of evolution. Whether you believe it through sexual selection or through natural selection, there is no doubt in anyone’s mind that the peacock plumage gives it greater likelihood of mating success. Over hundreds of generations, the peacocks with more elaborate plumage patterns and iridescence have more successfully passed their genes on to the next generation, making the plumage development resemble something like a sexual arms race. But imagine a sapient species of peafowl, possessed of the same faculty of reasoning and language as homo sapiens do. In such a peafowl species, the male could very well reason to the female- “Hey, forget the feathers, let’s just talk. If you like me and I like you, we could mate.” This sapient peafowl species could then throw off the yoke of elaborate plumage and substitute it with forthright communication to attract potential mates. The massive energy needed to generate plumage patterns can finally be channeled to other, less wasteful uses.

I can sense biologists rushing to remind me that peacock plumage cannot be called wasteful when it gives them an evolutionary advantage, or that homo sapiens still possess several biological markers of sexual selection, and they would be right in both cases. But then this article is not about actual peacocks, nor is it about evolution. It’s about brahmins, the so-called top-tier of Hinduism’s caste ladder, and the tier I was born into.

I see brahminism’s deeply layered and often assiduously followed ritualism as a phenomenon analogous to peacock feathers. Unlike peacocks, brahmins are homo sapiens who can reason and communicate. But what we see today is many variations of blind ritualism, devoid of the little meaning they might have possessed in an earlier time in history. Unlike peacocks, brahmins can indeed say to each other- “Hey, never mind whether I do this thing with my left hand or the right. Never mind whether I circle clockwise or anti-clockwise. Never mind if nineteen top-tiered brahmins are fed before my ritual begins. Forget the rituals. Let’s just talk. If you find me to be a decent person and I find you the same, that’s all that matters.”

##### But this doesn’t happen because brahmin rituals are to brahmins like peacock feathers are to peacocks. To peacocks, their plumage offers them sexual success. To brahmins, their plumage offers power, authority and social sanctity.

Brahminism establishes a social order where every caste and gender has a designated place in the hierarchy. Take the case of the river bank in my village. The bank is occupied by what I learnt was a lower caste. Since they live on the bank, the actual cremation ritual belongs to them. They light the first fire, and they ensure that the ashen remains are not desecrated when the deceased’s family has left. This means that in the established social order, during the cremation they have the upper hand. We, the upper caste brahmins, were not allowed to light my grandmother’s remains on fire before we had made promises of gifts that satisfied the bank-residing caste’s representative. The cacophonous bargaining, to my mind, was not the way to respect a dead person awaiting flames. But that was the way, and everyone knew the role they had to play. My uncles who lived in the village (unlike us city folk) conducted the negotiations as they were locals. My old grandfather was not to be bothered by trifle things as negotiations. My father was the man with the wallet- the guy who would give the money and other gifts. I was the grandson observing this curious reversal of caste hierarchies and making a mental note to write it down at some point in the future (I finally did).

Another example of how the order accommodates various levels in the hierarchy came from the evening meal on the thirteenth night. This was the night when, having performed many rituals over the past two weeks, we would serve food to the entire neighbourhood and anyone kind enough to commiserate with us. But there was a condition, no guest or family member could eat before we had served the community’s lowest caste- the men and women who cleaned our waste. This was the time for them to negotiate their share of the gifts and money, and they refused to eat a single morsel till the gifted quantity was satisfactory. Once they had their stomachs full, we could finally serve the guests. And when the guests were done, the family could eat too. Make no mistake- this transient reordering of the hierarchy still serves the higher caste, for it brings prestige and honour to them alone.

That lower caste could not cremate its dead at the same river bank, for example, and no brahmin would go to eat at their gate. The larger social order is evident in all things. The plumage belongs to the brahmin and beneficial only to him.

And yet looked another way, it is the brahmin that belongs to the plumage. I wondered what would happen if we cremated my grandmother ourselves, bypassing the bank-residing caste. Or if we did not serve dinner to anyone at all, including to the waste-cleaners. Technically, none could stop us from doing these things, but the loss would be ours. We would lose our status and prestige in the hierarchy. The officiating priest might abstain, fearing disgrace upon himself as well. It’s the classic “log kya kahenge” or “samaj kya bolega” (what will people say). The ritual brings us status only if we adhere to it completely, as prescribed by the priests. We cannot pick and choose, and honour comes to the brahmin who follows the ritual scrupulously and gifts generously. This works not just on the group but also on the individual. People in positions of power and authority cannot express atheism or reject ritual even if they might want to. If my grandfather did not follow the rituals as assiduously as he did, he would lose his status as the head of the larger family- one that included his younger brothers, sisters, cousins and their extended families. Word would spread across the village and in the larger community, and at the next funeral we might not bag the same officiating priest because we are no longer among the higher brahmins!

Women have a very specific but limited role in ritual. They aren’t even permitted to be present at the cremation site. But my younger sisters came along anyway, and their presence was resisted by the female members of the bank-residing caste. A bargain was finally struck where my sisters stood quite a distance away from the site, but were still periodically bothered by the women for being there. The specific things my mother had to do, as the daughter-in-law, were mandated not by my uncles or grandfather but by my aunts. It becomes important then to ask- who imposes this thing called patriarchy? Do we see patriarchy as a social order designed by and for men, or do we see it instead as a social order designed by people, usually for their own benefit, like all social orders are? When my mother was told that she had to bathe outside the house till the ceremonies were complete, she refused to comply. Who would understand her reservations better if not other women? Yet it was other women who tried to compel her. Are those women also culpable in the patriarchy then, or are they forgiven because as women they have merely internalised the patriarchy? If the latter, then why not forgive the men too?

##### Either all of us have internalised patriarchy and thus none is culpable, or all of us are responsible for our actions and culpability gender-agnostic. The plumage in brahmins, it would seem, comes to both sexes.

For the rituals that women do have, the men couldn’t care less. On the fourteenth day of ritual, the final one, when all the ceremonies were finally complete I found my grandfather’s sister- thus grandmother to me- trying to explain to the men that one ritual was still left. But apparently this was something just the women did, so my uncles paid no attention to the old woman. Taking sympathy, I helped her take two round balls of dough and bury them in a field across the home, uttering some prayers at her lead. I won’t forget the look of satisfaction that came upon her once this was done. This act was obviously very important to her, but in our internal hierarchy it was an act of very low importance. When we returned, a similar wave of contentment passed along my aunts and other gathered women- while they were busy serving food to the now hungry men.

Purity is another layer in the brahmin plumage, defining every aspect of life and ritual, and closely connected to status and hierarchy. There is evidence to speculate that in the past, the movement from carnivore to vegetarian diet was a movement towards ‘more purity.’ If a brahmin family wanted to feel and appear purer to its neighbour, abstaining from eating meat could provide that signal. Somewhere during this time, ultimate purity came to the brahmin who reared cows but did not consume their flesh. The more we practice customs of purity, the more we differentiate ourselves from those who do not. Think of the officiating priest I mentioned, who claimed that he officiated only for the higher brahmin families. This gives us a window to the monopolisation of ritual and concentration of prestige. Later, when giving me another sermon on the supremacy of brahmins he declared that the priests’ contribution to society was ‘knowledge.’

##### As if this labyrinth of complex ritual, conducted in a language most of us don’t even understand, historically reserved within an exclusive set of people, and important only to those that live by it, can be classified as knowledge. It’s knowledge only as much as the true parentage of Jon Snow is.

I remind you again that there is no doubt that some of these rituals have sacred origins, threaded with wisdom and understanding of human psychology. There is nothing inherently wrong in a worldview that sees death as another step in a long journey and designs traditions that help adherents with grief, closure and acceptance. To imagine that our forefathers exist in a higher reality and our kin that die pass on to join them may not be rational from a materialistically objective standpoint, but it has cultural and psychological importance. The problem, as we’ve discussed before, is when the tradition ossifies and the meaning erodes. What do we make of a culture that conducts its rituals entirely in a language it does not understand? Brahmins are homo sapiens, and they can shed their plumage anytime they like, even while they retain the bits of true importance or meaning.

But we’ve also seen how the ritual controls the brahmin more than he does the ritual. It’s easy for me to be a non-practitioner in Gurgaon, where the social order does not demand these rituals from me. Could I do the same if I lived in our village, embedded in the caste order? I doubt it, for the village is more a place of communal living and less of individual sovereignty. The eldest male of the family is the clear patriarch, and all internal norms flow from him. In turn, he adheres to the larger norms imposed by society and tradition. I remember now that my grandfather’s youngest brother had a falling out with the family decades ago. He left the village and moved to a city where he raised his family his way. This is why life doesn’t change much in the villages. People who do not or cannot conform slowly move away to the cities while the village stays the same. Remember that my father does not wear the janeyu thread, or that I misplaced mine a day after my thread ceremony. We can do this because we do not live in the same social context as my grandfather.

You can shed the plumage only where others do the same. In places where others flaunt their plumage, you must as well. It does not pay to be the first to do so. This takes us back to the earlier discussion on individual agency. It gives us an answer to questions like- why don’t more people speak out? Why don’t they resist the order? Why doesn’t someone raise their hand and point out how absurd all of it is? We can choose which side of the debate to fall on- are humans in the grip of social order and helpless to resist, or are they independent agents responsible for their choices?

This doesn’t necessarily make city life a bastion of psychological prosperity though, for the human heart always yearns for its roots. Urban life offers us no tethers. Here, we are subservient to institutions of a different nature, and utterly dependent on them for our material existence. Decades after my grandfather’s youngest brother moved to the city, his descendants re-established the old filial connections and have made a visit to the village a part of their annual calendar. Today, they’re more integrated with the larger kin-group than I ever could be. I exaggerate not when I tell you that after landing at Gorakhpur airport and taking a cab to our village, as we drove along farms and neighbouring villages the song came unbidden to me- Yeh jo desh hai mera, Swades hai mera (from the movie Swades). If that’s not a signal from your subconsciousness, I don’t know what is. Far away even from Gurgaon, bumping into an Indian in foreign lands is always a delight. But it isn’t easy to explain why that delight has a special touch of nostalgia if the Indian is from east UP and has a telling name- Mishra, Tiwari, Pandey, et al.

##### How then does the modern brahmin shed his plumage, composed in some part of symbolism, in some part of nostalgia, but in large part of absurd and hardened ritual?

That tradition and culture have a major pull was demonstrated to me when I met my grandfather’s old friend, a gentleman I fondly remember as Amod uncle. I remember, as a child, learning from Amod uncle of Noam Chomsky, Ayn Rand and Isaac Asimov. I recall my father and him discussing issues of physics and cosmology, and as an adult I would have wagered that Amod uncle is a rational, modern man shed of his plumage. I met him at the dinner on that thirteenth night, delighted to see his ageing eyes still hold that sparkle I associated with curiosity and intellect. It turned out though, that he would not eat. He had lost a family member a few months ago, and according to his priest’s prescription he could not eat food prepared outside his own home for a year. Reason, logic, superstition and ritual all co-existed in Amod uncle, and then I remembered that he now lived back in the village- when I was a child he lived in the city.

Is urbanisation then the evolving brahmin’s only hope? As Ishaaru, Deoria and Gorakhpur urbanise, will their brahmins shed their plumage? It depends on how we define urbanisation. If urbanisation means that more and more people from these lands are exposed to other worldviews and social orders, then the plumage will definitely evolve in the right way. But this will not necessarily be so if, while places like Gorakhpur get more flyovers and McDonald’s, they remain ensconced in their cultural bubble. Leaf plates will get replaced by thermocol ones, and clay utensils by plastics and disposables. Internet might become widespread, but people will join the digital bubbles that complement their social ones.

Evolution is an adaptive response to a change in the environment. Without the latter, nothing triggers the former. For the brahmin plumage to join the dustbin of cultural artefacts, something has to give. Without this, a tradition that has only ossified for centuries, if not millennia, will not suddenly develop change from within. And till then, people like me have a spectrum where we can choose where to place ourselves. We could be like my paternal uncle, looking to get his daughter married off at the age of sixteen. The same uncle who on most evenings regales us with mythological tales that have real, moral significance even today. We could be like Amod uncle, a Chomskian intellectual and a tradition-abiding brahmin at the same time. Or we could be like me- severed from my cultural roots and yet stuck with a yearning to be a part of it. I describe this as both being and not being brahmin.